Chapter 14 Verse 1
Sanskrit: śrī-bhagavān uvāca paraṁ bhūyaḥ pravakṣyāmi jñānānāṁ jñānam uttamam yaj jñātvā munayaḥ sarve parāṁ siddhim ito gatāḥ
Transliteration: śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; param — transcendental; bhūyaḥ — again; pravakṣyāmi — I shall speak; jñānānām — of all knowledge; jñānam — knowledge; uttamam — the supreme; yat — which; jñātvā — knowing; munayaḥ — the sages; sarve — all; parām — transcendental; siddhim — perfection; itaḥ — from this world; gatāḥ — attained.
Translation: The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Again I shall declare to you this supreme wisdom, the best of all knowledge, knowing which all the sages have attained the supreme perfection.

Chapter 14 Verse 2
Sanskrit: idaṁ jñānam upāśritya mama sādharmyam āgatāḥ sarge ’pi nopajāyante pralaye na vyathanti ca
Transliteration: idam — this; jñānam — knowledge; upāśritya — taking shelter of; mama — My; sādharmyam — same nature; āgatāḥ — having attained; sarge api — even in the creation; na — never; upajāyante — are born; pralaye — in the annihilation; na — nor; vyathanti — are disturbed; ca — also.
Translation: By becoming fixed in this knowledge, one can attain to the transcendental nature like My own. Thus established, one is not born at the time of creation or disturbed at the time of dissolution.

Chapter 14 Verse 3
Sanskrit: mama yonir mahad brahma tasmin garbhaṁ dadhāmy aham sambhavaḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ tato bhavati bhārata
Transliteration: mama — My; yoniḥ — source of birth; mahat — the total material existence; brahma — supreme; tasmin — in that; garbham — pregnancy; dadhāmi — create; aham — I; sambhavaḥ — the possibility; sarva-bhūtānām — of all living entities; tataḥ — thereafter; bhavati — becomes; bhārata — O son of Bharata.
Translation: The total material substance, called Brahman, is the source of birth, and it is that Brahman that I impregnate, making possible the births of all living beings, O son of Bharata.

Chapter 14 Verse 4
Sanskrit: sarva-yoniṣu kaunteya mūrtayaḥ sambhavanti yāḥ tāsāṁ brahma mahad yonir ahaṁ bīja-pradaḥ pitā
Transliteration: sarva-yoniṣu — in all species of life; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; mūrtayaḥ — forms; sambhavanti — they appear; yāḥ — which; tāsām — of all of them; brahma — the supreme; mahat yoniḥ — source of birth in the material substance; aham — I; bīja-pradaḥ — the seed-giving; pitā — father.
Translation: It should be understood that all species of life, O son of Kuntī, are made possible by birth in this material nature, and that I am the seed-giving father.

Chapter 14 Verse 5
Sanskrit: sattvaṁ rajas tama iti guṇāḥ prakṛti-sambhavāḥ nibadhnanti mahā-bāho dehe dehinam avyayam
Transliteration: sattvam — the mode of goodness; rajaḥ — the mode of passion; tamaḥ — the mode of ignorance; iti — thus; guṇāḥ — the qualities; prakṛti — material nature; sambhavāḥ — produced of; nibadhnanti — do condition; mahā-bāho — O mighty-armed one; dehe — in this body; dehinam — the living entity; avyayam — eternal.
Translation: Material nature consists of three modes – goodness, passion and ignorance. When the eternal living entity comes in contact with nature, O mighty-armed Arjuna, he becomes conditioned by these modes.

Chapter 14 Verse 6
Sanskrit: tatra sattvaṁ nirmalatvāt prakāśakam anāmayam sukha-saṅgena badhnāti jñāna-saṅgena cānagha
Transliteration: tatra — there; sattvam — the mode of goodness; nirmalatvāt — being purest in the material world; prakāśakam — illuminating; anāmayam — without any sinful reaction; sukha — with happiness; saṅgena — by association; badhnāti — conditions; jñāna — with knowledge; saṅgena — by association; ca — also; anagha — O sinless one.
Translation: O sinless one, the mode of goodness, being purer than the others, is illuminating, and it frees one from all sinful reactions. Those situated in that mode become conditioned by a sense of happiness and knowledge.

Chapter 14 Verse 7
Sanskrit: rajo rāgātmakaṁ viddhi tṛṣṇā-saṅga-samudbhavam tan nibadhnāti kaunteya karma-saṅgena dehinam
Transliteration: rajaḥ — the mode of passion; rāga-ātmakam — born of desire or lust; viddhi — know; tṛṣṇā — with hankering; saṅga — association; samudbhavam — produced of; tat — that; nibadhnāti — binds; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; karma-saṅgena — by association with fruitive activity; dehinam — the embodied.
Translation: The mode of passion is born of unlimited desires and longings, O son of Kuntī, and because of this the embodied living entity is bound to material fruitive actions.

Chapter 14 Verse 8
Sanskrit: tamas tv ajñāna-jaṁ viddhi mohanaṁ sarva-dehinām pramādālasya-nidrābhis tan nibadhnāti bhārata
Transliteration: tamaḥ — the mode of ignorance; tu — but; ajñāna-jam — produced of ignorance; viddhi — know; mohanam — the delusion; sarva-dehinām — of all embodied beings; pramāda — with madness; ālasya — indolence; nidrābhiḥ — and sleep; tat — that; nibadhnāti — binds; bhārata — O son of Bharata.
Translation: O son of Bharata, know that the mode of darkness, born of ignorance, is the delusion of all embodied living entities. The results of this mode are madness, indolence and sleep, which bind the conditioned soul.

Chapter 14 Verse 9
Sanskrit: sattvaṁ sukhe sañjayati rajaḥ karmaṇi bhārata jñānam āvṛtya tu tamaḥ pramāde sañjayaty uta
Transliteration: sattvam — the mode of goodness; sukhe — in happiness; sañjayati — binds; rajaḥ — the mode of passion; karmaṇi — in fruitive activity; bhārata — O son of Bharata; jñānam — knowledge; āvṛtya — covering; tu — but; tamaḥ — the mode of ignorance; pramāde — in madness; sañjayati — binds; uta — it is said.
Translation: O son of Bharata, the mode of goodness conditions one to happiness; passion conditions one to fruitive action; and ignorance, covering one’s knowledge, binds one to madness.

Chapter 14 Verse 10
Sanskrit: rajas tamaś cābhibhūya sattvaṁ bhavati bhārata rajaḥ sattvaṁ tamaś caiva tamaḥ sattvaṁ rajas tathā
Transliteration: rajaḥ — the mode of passion; tamaḥ — the mode of ignorance; ca — also; abhibhūya — surpassing; sattvam — the mode of goodness; bhavati — becomes prominent; bhārata — O son of Bharata; rajaḥ — the mode of passion; sattvam — the mode of goodness; tamaḥ — the mode of ignorance; ca — also; eva — like that; tamaḥ — the mode of ignorance; sattvam — the mode of goodness; rajaḥ — the mode of passion; tathā — thus.
Translation: Sometimes the mode of goodness becomes prominent, defeating the modes of passion and ignorance, O son of Bharata. Sometimes the mode of passion defeats goodness and ignorance, and at other times ignorance defeats goodness and passion. In this way there is always competition for supremacy.

Chapter 14 Verse 11
Sanskrit: sarva-dvāreṣu dehe ’smin prakāśa upajāyate jñānaṁ yadā tadā vidyād vivṛddhaṁ sattvam ity uta
Transliteration: sarva-dvāreṣu — in all the gates; dehe asmin — in this body; prakāśaḥ — the quality of illumination; upajāyate — develops; jñānam — knowledge; yadā — when; tadā — at that time; vidyāt — know; vivṛddham — increased; sattvam — the mode of goodness; iti uta — thus it is said.
Translation: The manifestation of the mode of goodness can be experienced when all the gates of the body are illuminated by knowledge.

Chapter 14 Verse 12
Sanskrit: lobhaḥ pravṛttir ārambhaḥ karmaṇām aśamaḥ spṛhā rajasy etāni jāyante vivṛddhe bharatarṣabha
Transliteration: lobhaḥ — greed; pravṛttiḥ — activity; ārambhaḥ — endeavor; karmaṇām — in activities; aśamaḥ — uncontrollable; spṛhā — desire; rajasi — of the mode of passion; etāni — all these; jāyante — develop; vivṛddhe — when there is an excess; bharata-ṛṣabha — O chief of the descendants of Bharata.
Translation: O chief of the Bhāratas, when there is an increase in the mode of passion the symptoms of great attachment, fruitive activity, intense endeavor, and uncontrollable desire and hankering develop.

Chapter 14 Verse 13
Sanskrit: aprakāśo ’pravṛttiś ca pramādo moha eva ca tamasy etāni jāyante vivṛddhe kuru-nandana
Transliteration: aprakāśaḥ — darkness; apravṛttiḥ — inactivity; ca — and; pramādaḥ — madness; mohaḥ — illusion; eva — certainly; ca — also; tamasi — the mode of ignorance; etāni — these; jāyante — are manifested; vivṛddhe — when developed; kuru-nandana — O son of Kuru.
Translation: When there is an increase in the mode of ignorance, O son of Kuru, darkness, inertia, madness and illusion are manifested.

Chapter 14 Verse 14
Sanskrit: yadā sattve pravṛddhe tu pralayaṁ yāti deha-bhṛt tadottama-vidāṁ lokān amalān pratipadyate
Transliteration: yadā — when; sattve — the mode of goodness; pravṛddhe — developed; tu — but; pralayam — dissolution; yāti — goes; deha-bhṛt — the embodied; tadā — at that time; uttama-vidām — of the great sages; lokān — the planets; amalān — pure; pratipadyate — attains.
Translation: When one dies in the mode of goodness, he attains to the pure higher planets of the great sages.

Chapter 14 Verse 15
Sanskrit: rajasi pralayaṁ gatvā karma-saṅgiṣu jāyate tathā pralīnas tamasi mūḍha-yoniṣu jāyate
Transliteration: rajasi — in passion; pralayam — dissolution; gatvā — attaining; karma-saṅgiṣu — in the association of those engaged in fruitive activities; jāyate — takes birth; tathā — similarly; pralīnaḥ — being dissolved; tamasi — in ignorance; mūḍha-yoniṣu — in animal species; jāyate — takes birth.
Translation: When one dies in the mode of passion, he takes birth among those engaged in fruitive activities; and when one dies in the mode of ignorance, he takes birth in the animal kingdom.

Chapter 14 Verse 16
Sanskrit: karmaṇaḥ sukṛtasyāhuḥ sāttvikaṁ nirmalaṁ phalam rajasas tu phalaṁ duḥkham ajñānaṁ tamasaḥ phalam
Transliteration: karmaṇaḥ — of work; su-kṛtasya — pious; āhuḥ — is said; sāttvikam — in the mode of goodness; nirmalam — purified; phalam — the result; rajasaḥ — of the mode of passion; tu — but; phalam — the result; duḥkham — misery; ajñānam — nonsense; tamasaḥ — of the mode of ignorance; phalam — the result.
Translation: The result of pious action is pure and is said to be in the mode of goodness. But action done in the mode of passion results in misery, and action performed in the mode of ignorance results in foolishness.

Chapter 14 Verse 17
Sanskrit: sattvāt sañjāyate jñānaṁ rajaso lobha eva ca pramāda-mohau tamaso bhavato ’jñānam eva ca
Transliteration: sattvāt — from the mode of goodness; sañjāyate — develops; jñānam — knowledge; rajasaḥ — from the mode of passion; lobhaḥ — greed; eva — certainly; ca — also; pramāda — madness; mohau — and illusion; tamasaḥ — from the mode of ignorance; bhavataḥ — develop; ajñānam — nonsense; eva — certainly; ca — also.
Translation: From the mode of goodness, real knowledge develops; from the mode of passion, greed develops; and from the mode of ignorance develop foolishness, madness and illusion.

Chapter 14 Verse 18
Sanskrit: ūrdhvaṁ gacchanti sattva-sthā madhye tiṣṭhanti rājasāḥ jaghanya-guṇa-vṛtti-sthā adho gacchanti tāmasāḥ
Transliteration: ūrdhvam — upwards; gacchanti — go; sattva-sthāḥ — those situated in the mode of goodness; madhye — in the middle; tiṣṭhanti — dwell; rājasāḥ — those situated in the mode of passion; jaghanya — of abominable; guṇa — quality; vṛtti-sthāḥ — whose occupation; adhaḥ — down; gacchanti — go; tāmasāḥ — persons in the mode of ignorance.
Translation: Those situated in the mode of goodness gradually go upward to the higher planets; those in the mode of passion live on the earthly planets; and those in the abominable mode of ignorance go down to the hellish worlds.

Chapter 14 Verse 19
Sanskrit: nānyaṁ guṇebhyaḥ kartāraṁ yadā draṣṭānupaśyati guṇebhyaś ca paraṁ vetti mad-bhāvaṁ so ’dhigacchati
Transliteration: na — no; anyam — other; guṇebhyaḥ — than the qualities; kartāram — performer; yadā — when; draṣṭā — a seer; anupaśyati — sees properly; guṇebhyaḥ — to the modes of nature; ca — and; param — transcendental; vetti — knows; mat-bhāvam — to My spiritual nature; saḥ — he; adhigacchati — is promoted.
Translation: When one properly sees that in all activities no other performer is at work than these modes of nature and he knows the Supreme Lord, who is transcendental to all these modes, he attains My spiritual nature.

Chapter 14 Verse 20
Sanskrit: guṇān etān atītya trīn dehī deha-samudbhavān janma-mṛtyu-jarā-duḥkhair vimukto ’mṛtam aśnute
Transliteration: guṇān — qualities; etān — all these; atītya — transcending; trīn — three; dehī — the embodied; deha — the body; samudbhavān — produced of; janma — of birth; mṛtyu — death; jarā — and old age; duḥkhaiḥ — the distresses; vimuktaḥ — being freed from; amṛtam — nectar; aśnute — he enjoys.
Translation: When the embodied being is able to transcend these three modes associated with the material body, he can become free from birth, death, old age and their distresses and can enjoy nectar even in this life.

Chapter 14 Verse 21
Sanskrit: arjuna uvāca kair liṅgais trīn guṇān etān atīto bhavati prabho kim-ācāraḥ kathaṁ caitāṁs trīn guṇān ativartate
Transliteration: arjunaḥ uvāca — Arjuna said; kaiḥ — by which; liṅgaiḥ — symptoms; trīn — three; guṇān — qualities; etān — all these; atītaḥ — having transcended; bhavati — is; prabho — O my Lord; kim — what; ācāraḥ — behavior; katham — how; ca — also; etān — these; trīn — three; guṇān — qualities; ativartate — transcends.
Translation: Arjuna inquired: O my dear Lord, by which symptoms is one known who is transcendental to these three modes? What is his behavior? And how does he transcend the modes of nature?

Chapter 14 Verse 26
Sanskrit: māṁ ca yo ’vyabhicāreṇa bhakti-yogena sevate sa guṇān samatītyaitān brahma-bhūyāya kalpate
Transliteration: mām — unto Me; ca — also; yaḥ — a person who; avyabhicāreṇa — without fail; bhakti-yogena — by devotional service; sevate — renders service; saḥ — he; guṇān — the modes of material nature; samatītya — transcending; etān — all these; brahma-bhūyāya — elevated to the Brahman platform; kalpate — becomes.
Translation: One who engages in full devotional service, unfailing in all circumstances, at once transcends the modes of material nature and thus comes to the level of Brahman.

Chapter 14 Verse 27
Sanskrit: brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham amṛtasyāvyayasya ca śāśvatasya ca dharmasya sukhasyaikāntikasya ca
Transliteration: brahmaṇaḥ — of the impersonal brahma-jyotir; hi — certainly; pratiṣṭhā — the rest; aham — I am; amṛtasya — of the immortal; avyayasya — of the imperishable; ca — also; śāśvatasya — of the eternal; ca — and; dharmasya — of the constitutional position; sukhasya — of happiness; aikāntikasya — ultimate; ca — also.
Translation: And I am the basis of the impersonal Brahman, which is immortal, imperishable and eternal and is the constitutional position of ultimate happiness.
