Chapter 17 Verse 1
Sanskrit: arjuna uvāca ye śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ teṣāṁ niṣṭhā tu kā kṛṣṇa sattvam āho rajas tamaḥ
Transliteration: arjunaḥ uvāca — Arjuna said; ye — those who; śāstra-vidhim — the regulations of scripture; utsṛjya — giving up; yajante — worship; śraddhayā — full faith; anvitāḥ — possessed of; teṣām — of them; niṣṭhā — the faith; tu — but; kā — what; kṛṣṇa — O Kṛṣṇa; sattvam — in goodness; āho — or else; rajaḥ — in passion; tamaḥ — in ignorance.
Translation: Arjuna inquired: O Kṛṣṇa, what is the situation of those who do not follow the principles of scripture but worship according to their own imagination? Are they in goodness, in passion or in ignorance?

Chapter 17 Verse 2
Sanskrit: śrī-bhagavān uvāca tri-vidhā bhavati śraddhā dehināṁ sā svabhāva-jā sāttvikī rājasī caiva tāmasī ceti tāṁ śṛṇu
Transliteration: śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; tri-vidhā — of three kinds; bhavati — becomes; śraddhā — the faith; dehinām — of the embodied; sā — that; sva-bhāva-jā — according to his mode of material nature; sāttvikī — in the mode of goodness; rājasī — in the mode of passion; ca — also; eva — certainly; tāmasī — in the mode of ignorance; ca — and; iti — thus; tām — that; śṛṇu — hear from Me.
Translation: The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: According to the modes of nature acquired by the embodied soul, one’s faith can be of three kinds – in goodness, in passion or in ignorance. Now hear about this.

Chapter 17 Verse 3
Sanskrit: sattvānurūpā sarvasya śraddhā bhavati bhārata śraddhā-mayo ’yaṁ puruṣo yo yac-chraddhaḥ sa eva saḥ
Transliteration: sattva-anurūpā — according to the existence; sarvasya — of everyone; śraddhā — faith; bhavati — becomes; bhārata — O son of Bharata; śraddhā — faith; mayaḥ — full of; ayam — this; puruṣaḥ — living entity; yaḥ — who; yat — having which; śraddhaḥ — faith; saḥ — thus; eva — certainly; saḥ — he.
Translation: O son of Bharata, according to one’s existence under the various modes of nature, one evolves a particular kind of faith. The living being is said to be of a particular faith according to the modes he has acquired.

Chapter 17 Verse 4
Sanskrit: yajante sāttvikā devān yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi rājasāḥ pretān bhūta-gaṇāṁś cānye yajante tāmasā janāḥ
Transliteration: yajante — worship; sāttvikāḥ — those who are in the mode of goodness; devān — demigods; yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi — demons; rājasāḥ — those who are in the mode of passion; pretān — spirits of the dead; bhūta-gaṇān — ghosts; ca — and; anye — others; yajante — worship; tāmasāḥ — in the mode of ignorance; janāḥ — people.
Translation: Men in the mode of goodness worship the demigods; those in the mode of passion worship the demons; and those in the mode of ignorance worship ghosts and spirits.

Chapter 17 Verse 7
Sanskrit: āhāras tv api sarvasya tri-vidho bhavati priyaḥ yajñas tapas tathā dānaṁ teṣāṁ bhedam imaṁ śṛṇu
Transliteration: āhāraḥ — eating; tu — certainly; api — also; sarvasya — of everyone; tri-vidhaḥ — of three kinds; bhavati — there is; priyaḥ — dear; yajñaḥ — sacrifice; tapaḥ — austerity; tathā — also; dānam — charity; teṣām — of them; bhedam — the differences; imam — this; śṛṇu — hear.
Translation: Even the food each person prefers is of three kinds, according to the three modes of material nature. The same is true of sacrifices, austerities and charity. Now hear of the distinctions between them.

Chapter 17 Verse 8
Sanskrit: āyuḥ-sattva-balārogya- sukha-prīti-vivardhanāḥ rasyāḥ snigdhāḥ sthirā hṛdyā āhārāḥ sāttvika-priyāḥ
Transliteration: āyuḥ — duration of life; sattva — existence; bala — strength; ārogya — health; sukha — happiness; prīti — and satisfaction; vivardhanāḥ — increasing; rasyāḥ — juicy; snigdhāḥ — fatty; sthirāḥ — enduring; hṛdyāḥ — pleasing to the heart; āhārāḥ — food; sāttvika — to one in goodness; priyāḥ — palatable.
Translation: Foods dear to those in the mode of goodness increase the duration of life, purify one’s existence and give strength, health, happiness and satisfaction. Such foods are juicy, fatty, wholesome, and pleasing to the heart.

Chapter 17 Verse 9
Sanskrit: kaṭv-amla-lavaṇāty-uṣṇa- tīkṣṇa-rūkṣa-vidāhinaḥ āhārā rājasasyeṣṭā duḥkha-śokāmaya-pradāḥ
Transliteration: kaṭu — bitter; amla — sour; lavaṇa — salty; ati-uṣṇa — very hot; tīkṣṇa — pungent; rūkṣa — dry; vidāhinaḥ — burning; āhārāḥ — food; rājasasya — to one in the mode of passion; iṣṭāḥ — palatable; duḥkha — distress; śoka — misery; āmaya — disease; pradāḥ — causing.
Translation: Foods that are too bitter, too sour, salty, hot, pungent, dry and burning are dear to those in the mode of passion. Such foods cause distress, misery and disease.

Chapter 17 Verse 10
Sanskrit: yāta-yāmaṁ gata-rasaṁ pūti paryuṣitaṁ ca yat ucchiṣṭam api cāmedhyaṁ bhojanaṁ tāmasa-priyam
Transliteration: yāta-yāmam — food cooked three hours before being eaten; gata-rasam — tasteless; pūti — bad-smelling; paryuṣitam — decomposed; ca — also; yat — that which; ucchiṣṭam — remnants of food eaten by others; api — also; ca — and; amedhyam — untouchable; bhojanam — eating; tāmasa — to one in the mode of darkness; priyam — dear.
Translation: Food prepared more than three hours before being eaten, food that is tasteless, decomposed and putrid, and food consisting of remnants and untouchable things is dear to those in the mode of darkness.

Chapter 17 Verse 11
Sanskrit: aphalākāṅkṣibhir yajño vidhi-diṣṭo ya ijyate yaṣṭavyam eveti manaḥ samādhāya sa sāttvikaḥ
Transliteration: aphala-ākāṅkṣibhiḥ — by those devoid of desire for result; yajñaḥ — sacrifice; vidhi-diṣṭaḥ — according to the direction of scripture; yaḥ — which; ijyate — is performed; yaṣṭavyam — must be performed; eva — certainly; iti — thus; manaḥ — mind; samādhāya — fixing; saḥ — it; sāttvikaḥ — in the mode of goodness.
Translation: Of sacrifices, the sacrifice performed according to the directions of scripture, as a matter of duty, by those who desire no reward, is of the nature of goodness.

Chapter 17 Verse 12
Sanskrit: abhisandhāya tu phalaṁ dambhārtham api caiva yat ijyate bharata-śreṣṭha taṁ yajñaṁ viddhi rājasam
Transliteration: abhisandhāya — desiring; tu — but; phalam — the result; dambha — pride; artham — for the sake of; api — also; ca — and; eva — certainly; yat — that which; ijyate — is performed; bharata-śreṣṭha — O chief of the Bhāratas; tam — that; yajñam — sacrifice; viddhi — know; rājasam — in the mode of passion.
Translation: But the sacrifice performed for some material benefit, or for the sake of pride, O chief of the Bhāratas, you should know to be in the mode of passion.

Chapter 17 Verse 13
Sanskrit: vidhi-hīnam asṛṣṭānnaṁ mantra-hīnam adakṣiṇam śraddhā-virahitaṁ yajñaṁ tāmasaṁ paricakṣate
Transliteration: vidhi-hīnam — without scriptural direction; asṛṣṭa-annam — without distribution of prasādam; mantra-hīnam — with no chanting of the Vedic hymns; adakṣiṇam — with no remunerations to the priests; śraddhā — faith; virahitam — without; yajñam — sacrifice; tāmasam — in the mode of ignorance; paricakṣate — is to be considered.
Translation: Any sacrifice performed without regard for the directions of scripture, without distribution of prasādam [spiritual food], without chanting of Vedic hymns and remunerations to the priests, and without faith is considered to be in the mode of ignorance.

Chapter 17 Verse 14
Sanskrit: deva-dvija-guru-prājña- pūjanaṁ śaucam ārjavam brahmacaryam ahiṁsā ca śārīraṁ tapa ucyate
Transliteration: deva — of the Supreme Lord; dvija — the brāhmaṇas; guru — the spiritual master; prājña — and worshipable personalities; pūjanam — worship; śaucam — cleanliness; ārjavam — simplicity; brahmacaryam — celibacy; ahiṁsā — nonviolence; ca — also; śārīram — pertaining to the body; tapaḥ — austerity; ucyate — is said to be.
Translation: Austerity of the body consists in worship of the Supreme Lord, the brāhmaṇas, the spiritual master, and superiors like the father and mother, and in cleanliness, simplicity, celibacy and nonviolence.

Chapter 17 Verse 15
Sanskrit: anudvega-karaṁ vākyaṁ satyaṁ priya-hitaṁ ca yat svādhyāyābhyasanaṁ caiva vāṅ-mayaṁ tapa ucyate
Transliteration: anudvega-karam — not agitating; vākyam — words; satyam — truthful; priya — dear; hitam — beneficial; ca — also; yat — which; svādhyāya — of Vedic study; abhyasanam — practice; ca — also; eva — certainly; vāk-mayam — of the voice; tapaḥ — austerity; ucyate — is said to be.
Translation: Austerity of speech consists in speaking words that are truthful, pleasing, beneficial, and not agitating to others, and also in regularly reciting Vedic literature.

Chapter 17 Verse 16
Sanskrit: manaḥ-prasādaḥ saumyatvaṁ maunam ātma-vinigrahaḥ bhāva-saṁśuddhir ity etat tapo mānasam ucyate
Transliteration: manaḥ-prasādaḥ — satisfaction of the mind; saumyatvam — being without duplicity towards others; maunam — gravity; ātma — of the self; vinigrahaḥ — control; bhāva — of one’s nature; saṁśuddhiḥ — purification; iti — thus; etat — this; tapaḥ — austerity; mānasam — of the mind; ucyate — is said to be.
Translation: And satisfaction, simplicity, gravity, self-control and purification of one’s existence are the austerities of the mind.

Chapter 17 Verse 17
Sanskrit: śraddhayā parayā taptaṁ tapas tat tri-vidhaṁ naraiḥ aphalākāṅkṣibhir yuktaiḥ sāttvikaṁ paricakṣate
Transliteration: śraddhayā — with faith; parayā — transcendental; taptam — executed; tapaḥ — austerity; tat — that; tri-vidham — of three kinds; naraiḥ — by men; aphala-ākāṅkṣibhiḥ — who are without desires for fruits; yuktaiḥ — engaged; sāttvikam — in the mode of goodness; paricakṣate — is called.
Translation: This threefold austerity, performed with transcendental faith by men not expecting material benefits but engaged only for the sake of the Supreme, is called austerity in goodness.

Chapter 17 Verse 18
Sanskrit: satkāra-māna-pūjārthaṁ tapo dambhena caiva yat kriyate tad iha proktaṁ rājasaṁ calam adhruvam
Transliteration: sat-kāra — respect; māna — honor; pūjā — and worship; artham — for the sake of; tapaḥ — austerity; dambhena — with pride; ca — also; eva — certainly; yat — which; kriyate — is performed; tat — that; iha — in this world; proktam — is said; rājasam — in the mode of passion; calam — flickering; adhruvam — temporary.
Translation: Penance performed out of pride and for the sake of gaining respect, honor and worship is said to be in the mode of passion. It is neither stable nor permanent.

Chapter 17 Verse 19
Sanskrit: mūḍha-grāheṇātmano yat pīḍayā kriyate tapaḥ parasyotsādanārthaṁ vā tat tāmasam udāhṛtam
Transliteration: mūḍha — foolish; grāheṇa — with endeavor; ātmanaḥ — of one’s own self; yat — which; pīḍayā — by torture; kriyate — is performed; tapaḥ — penance; parasya — to others; utsādana-artham — for the sake of causing annihilation; vā — or; tat — that; tāmasam — in the mode of darkness; udāhṛtam — is said to be.
Translation: Penance performed out of foolishness, with self-torture or to destroy or injure others, is said to be in the mode of ignorance.

Chapter 17 Verse 20
Sanskrit: dātavyam iti yad dānaṁ dīyate ’nupakāriṇe deśe kāle ca pātre ca tad dānaṁ sāttvikaṁ smṛtam
Transliteration: dātavyam — worth giving; iti — thus; yat — that which; dānam — charity; dīyate — is given; anupakāriṇe — irrespective of return; deśe — in a proper place; kāle — at a proper time; ca — also; pātre — to a suitable person; ca — and; tat — that; dānam — charity; sāttvikam — in the mode of goodness; smṛtam — is considered.
Translation: Charity given out of duty, without expectation of return, at the proper time and place, and to a worthy person is considered to be in the mode of goodness.

Chapter 17 Verse 21
Sanskrit: yat tu pratyupakārārthaṁ phalam uddiśya vā punaḥ dīyate ca parikliṣṭaṁ tad dānaṁ rājasaṁ smṛtam
Transliteration: yat — that which; tu — but; prati-upakāra-artham — for the sake of getting some return; phalam — a result; uddiśya — desiring; vā — or; punaḥ — again; dīyate — is given; ca — also; parikliṣṭam — grudgingly; tat — that; dānam — charity; rājasam — in the mode of passion; smṛtam — is understood to be.
Translation: But charity performed with the expectation of some return, or with a desire for fruitive results, or in a grudging mood is said to be charity in the mode of passion.

Chapter 17 Verse 22
Sanskrit: adeśa-kāle yad dānam apātrebhyaś ca dīyate asat-kṛtam avajñātaṁ tat tāmasam udāhṛtam
Transliteration: adeśa — at an unpurified place; kāle — and unpurified time; yat — that which; dānam — charity; apātrebhyaḥ — to unworthy persons; ca — also; dīyate — is given; asat-kṛtam — without respect; avajñātam — without proper attention; tat — that; tāmasam — in the mode of darkness; udāhṛtam — is said to be.
Translation: And charity performed at an impure place, at an improper time, to unworthy persons, or without proper attention and respect is said to be in the mode of ignorance.

Chapter 17 Verse 23
Sanskrit: oṁ tat sad iti nirdeśo brahmaṇas tri-vidhaḥ smṛtaḥ brāhmaṇās tena vedāś ca yajñāś ca vihitāḥ purā
Transliteration: oṁ — indication of the Supreme; tat — that; sat — eternal; iti — thus; nirdeśaḥ — indication; brahmaṇaḥ — of the Supreme; tri-vidhaḥ — threefold; smṛtaḥ — is considered; brāhmaṇāḥ — the brāhmaṇas; tena — with that; vedāḥ — the Vedic literature; ca — also; yajñāḥ — sacrifice; ca — also; vihitāḥ — used; purā — formerly.
Translation: From the beginning of creation, the three words oṁ tat sat were used to indicate the Supreme Absolute Truth. These three symbolic representations were used by brāhmaṇas while chanting the hymns of the Vedas and during sacrifices for the satisfaction of the Supreme.

Chapter 17 Verse 24
Sanskrit: tasmād oṁ ity udāhṛtya yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-kriyāḥ pravartante vidhānoktāḥ satataṁ brahma-vādinām
Transliteration: tasmāt — therefore; oṁ — beginning with oṁ; iti — thus; udāhṛtya — indicating; yajña — of sacrifice; dāna — charity; tapaḥ — and penance; kriyāḥ — performances; pravartante — begin; vidhāna-uktāḥ — according to scriptural regulation; satatam — always; brahma-vādinām — of the transcendentalists.
Translation: Therefore, transcendentalists undertaking performances of sacrifice, charity and penance in accordance with scriptural regulations begin always with oṁ, to attain the Supreme.

Chapter 17 Verse 25
Sanskrit: tad ity anabhisandhāya phalaṁ yajña-tapaḥ-kriyāḥ dāna-kriyāś ca vividhāḥ kriyante mokṣa-kāṅkṣibhiḥ
Transliteration: tat — that; iti — thus; anabhisandhāya — without desiring; phalam — the fruitive result; yajña — of sacrifice; tapaḥ — and penance; kriyāḥ — activities; dāna — of charity; kriyāḥ — activities; ca — also; vividhāḥ — various; kriyante — are done; mokṣa-kāṅkṣibhiḥ — by those who actually desire liberation.
Translation: Without desiring fruitive results, one should perform various kinds of sacrifice, penance and charity with the word tat. The purpose of such transcendental activities is to get free from material entanglement.

Chapter 17 Verse 28
Sanskrit: aśraddhayā hutaṁ dattaṁ tapas taptaṁ kṛtaṁ ca yat asad ity ucyate pārtha na ca tat pretya no iha
Transliteration: aśraddhayā — without faith; hutam — offered in sacrifice; dattam — given; tapaḥ — penance; taptam — executed; kṛtam — performed; ca — also; yat — that which; asat — false; iti — thus; ucyate — is said to be; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; na — never; ca — also; tat — that; pretya — after death; na u — nor; iha — in this life.
Translation: Anything done as sacrifice, charity or penance without faith in the Supreme, O son of Pṛthā, is impermanent. It is called asat and is useless both in this life and the next.
