Chapter 8 Verse 1
Sanskrit: arjuna uvāca kiṁ tad brahma kim adhyātmaṁ kiṁ karma puruṣottama adhibhūtaṁ ca kiṁ proktam adhidaivaṁ kim ucyate
Transliteration: arjunaḥ uvāca — Arjuna said; kim — what; tat — that; brahma — Brahman; kim — what; adhyātmam — the self; kim — what; karma — fruitive activities; puruṣa-uttama — O Supreme Person; adhibhūtam — the material manifestation; ca — and; kim — what; proktam — is called; adhidaivam — the demigods; kim — what; ucyate — is called.
Translation: Arjuna inquired: O my Lord, O Supreme Person, what is Brahman? What is the self? What are fruitive activities? What is this material manifestation? And what are the demigods? Please explain this to me.

Chapter 8 Verse 2
Sanskrit: adhiyajñaḥ kathaṁ ko ’tra dehe ’smin madhusūdana prayāṇa-kāle ca kathaṁ jñeyo ’si niyatātmabhiḥ
Transliteration: adhiyajñaḥ — the Lord of sacrifice; katham — how; kaḥ — who; atra — here; dehe — in the body; asmin — this; madhusūdana — O Madhusūdana; prayāṇa-kāle — at the time of death; ca — and; katham — how; jñeyaḥ asi — You can be known; niyata-ātmabhiḥ — by the self-controlled.
Translation: Who is the Lord of sacrifice, and how does He live in the body, O Madhusūdana? And how can those engaged in devotional service know You at the time of death?

Chapter 8 Verse 3
Sanskrit: śrī-bhagavān uvāca akṣaraṁ brahma paramaṁ svabhāvo ’dhyātmam ucyate bhūta-bhāvodbhava-karo visargaḥ karma-saṁjñitaḥ
Transliteration: śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; akṣaram — indestructible; brahma — Brahman; paramam — transcendental; svabhāvaḥ — eternal nature; adhyātmam — the self; ucyate — is called; bhūta-bhāva-udbhava-karaḥ — producing the material bodies of the living entities; visargaḥ — creation; karma — fruitive activities; saṁjñitaḥ — is called.
Translation: The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: The indestructible, transcendental living entity is called Brahman, and his eternal nature is called adhyātma, the self. Action pertaining to the development of the material bodies of the living entities is called karma, or fruitive activities.

Chapter 8 Verse 4
Sanskrit: adhibhūtaṁ kṣaro bhāvaḥ puruṣaś cādhidaivatam adhiyajño ’ham evātra dehe deha-bhṛtāṁ vara
Transliteration: adhibhūtam — the physical manifestation; kṣaraḥ — constantly changing; bhāvaḥ — nature; puruṣaḥ — the universal form, including all the demigods, like the sun and moon; ca — and; adhidaivatam — called adhidaiva; adhiyajñaḥ — the Supersoul; aham — I (Kṛṣṇa); eva — certainly; atra — in this; dehe — body; deha-bhṛtām — of the embodied; vara — O best.
Translation: O best of the embodied beings, the physical nature, which is constantly changing, is called adhibhūta [the material manifestation]. The universal form of the Lord, which includes all the demigods, like those of the sun and moon, is called adhidaiva. And I, the Supreme Lord, represented as the Supersoul in the heart of every embodied being, am called adhiyajña [the Lord of sacrifice].

Chapter 8 Verse 5
Sanskrit: anta-kāle ca mām eva smaran muktvā kalevaram yaḥ prayāti sa mad-bhāvaṁ yāti nāsty atra saṁśayaḥ
Transliteration: anta-kāle — at the end of life; ca — also; mām — Me; eva — certainly; smaran — remembering; muktvā — quitting; kalevaram — the body; yaḥ — he who; prayāti — goes; saḥ — he; mat-bhāvam — My nature; yāti — achieves; na — not; asti — there is; atra — here; saṁśayaḥ — doubt.
Translation: And whoever, at the end of his life, quits his body remembering Me alone at once attains My nature. Of this there is no doubt.

Chapter 8 Verse 6
Sanskrit: yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaran bhāvaṁ tyajaty ante kalevaram taṁ tam evaiti kaunteya sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ
Transliteration: yam yam — whatever; vā api — at all; smaran — remembering; bhāvam — nature; tyajati — gives up; ante — at the end; kalevaram — this body; tam tam — similar; eva — certainly; eti — gets; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; sadā — always; tat — that; bhāva — state of being; bhāvitaḥ — remembering.
Translation: Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his body, O son of Kuntī, that state he will attain without fail.

Chapter 8 Verse 7
Sanskrit: tasmāt sarveṣu kāleṣu mām anusmara yudhya ca mayy arpita-mano-buddhir mām evaiṣyasy asaṁśayaḥ
Transliteration: tasmāt — therefore; sarveṣu — at all; kāleṣu — times; mām — Me; anusmara — go on remembering; yudhya — fight; ca — also; mayi — unto Me; arpita — surrendering; manaḥ — mind; buddhiḥ — intellect; mām — unto Me; eva — surely; eṣyasi — you will attain; asaṁśayaḥ — beyond a doubt.
Translation: Therefore, Arjuna, you should always think of Me in the form of Kṛṣṇa and at the same time carry out your prescribed duty of fighting. With your activities dedicated to Me and your mind and intelligence fixed on Me, you will attain Me without doubt.

Chapter 8 Verse 8
Sanskrit: abhyāsa-yoga-yuktena cetasā nānya-gāminā paramaṁ puruṣaṁ divyaṁ yāti pārthānucintayan
Transliteration: abhyāsa-yoga — in the practice of meditation; yuktena — being engaged; cetasā — by the mind and intelligence; na anya-gāminā — without their being deviated; paramam — the Supreme; puruṣam — Personality of Godhead; divyam — transcendental; yāti — one achieves; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; anucintayan — constantly thinking of.
Translation: He who meditates on Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, his mind constantly engaged in remembering Me, undeviated from the path, he, O Pārtha, is sure to reach Me.

Chapter 8 Verse 9
Sanskrit: kaviṁ purāṇam anuśāsitāram aṇor aṇīyāṁsam anusmared yaḥ sarvasya dhātāram acintya-rūpam āditya-varṇaṁ tamasaḥ parastāt
Transliteration: kavim — the one who knows everything; purāṇam — the oldest; anuśāsitāram — the controller; aṇoḥ — than the atom; aṇīyāṁsam — smaller; anusmaret — always thinks of; yaḥ — one who; sarvasya — of everything; dhātāram — the maintainer; acintya — inconceivable; rūpam — whose form; āditya-varṇam — luminous like the sun; tamasaḥ — to darkness; parastāt — transcendental.
Translation: One should meditate upon the Supreme Person as the one who knows everything, as He who is the oldest, who is the controller, who is smaller than the smallest, who is the maintainer of everything, who is beyond all material conception, who is inconceivable, and who is always a person. He is luminous like the sun, and He is transcendental, beyond this material nature.

Chapter 8 Verse 10
Sanskrit: prayāṇa-kāle manasācalena bhaktyā yukto yoga-balena caiva bhruvor madhye prāṇam āveśya samyak sa taṁ paraṁ puruṣam upaiti divyam
Transliteration: prayāṇa-kāle — at the time of death; manasā — by the mind; acalena — without its being deviated; bhaktyā — in full devotion; yuktaḥ — engaged; yoga-balena — by the power of mystic yoga; ca — also; eva — certainly; bhruvoḥ — the two eyebrows; madhye — between; prāṇam — the life air; āveśya — establishing; samyak — completely; saḥ — he; tam — that; param — transcendental; puruṣam — Personality of Godhead; upaiti — achieves; divyam — in the spiritual kingdom.
Translation: One who, at the time of death, fixes his life air between the eyebrows and, by the strength of yoga, with an undeviating mind, engages himself in remembering the Supreme Lord in full devotion, will certainly attain to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Chapter 8 Verse 11
Sanskrit: yad akṣaraṁ veda-vido vadanti viśanti yad yatayo vīta-rāgāḥ yad icchanto brahma-caryaṁ caranti tat te padaṁ saṅgraheṇa pravakṣye
Transliteration: yat — that which; akṣaram — syllable oṁ; veda-vidaḥ — persons conversant with the Vedas; vadanti — say; viśanti — enter; yat — in which; yatayaḥ — great sages; vīta-rāgāḥ — in the renounced order of life; yat — that which; icchantaḥ — desiring; brahma-caryam — celibacy; caranti — practice; tat — that; te — unto you; padam — situation; saṅgraheṇa — in summary; pravakṣye — I shall explain.
Translation: Persons who are learned in the Vedas, who utter oṁ-kāra, and who are great sages in the renounced order enter into Brahman. Desiring such perfection, one practices celibacy. I shall now briefly explain to you this process by which one may attain salvation.

Chapter 8 Verse 12
Sanskrit: sarva-dvārāṇi saṁyamya mano hṛdi nirudhya ca mūrdhny ādhāyātmanaḥ prāṇam āsthito yoga-dhāraṇām
Transliteration: sarva-dvārāṇi — all the doors of the body; saṁyamya — controlling; manaḥ — the mind; hṛdi — in the heart; nirudhya — confining; ca — also; mūrdhni — on the head; ādhāya — fixing; ātmanaḥ — of the soul; prāṇam — the life air; āsthitaḥ — situated in; yoga-dhāraṇām — the yogic situation.
Translation: The yogic situation is that of detachment from all sensual engagements. Closing all the doors of the senses and fixing the mind on the heart and the life air at the top of the head, one establishes himself in yoga.

Chapter 8 Verse 13
Sanskrit: oṁ ity ekākṣaraṁ brahma vyāharan mām anusmaran yaḥ prayāti tyajan dehaṁ sa yāti paramāṁ gatim
Transliteration: oṁ — the combination of letters oṁ (oṁ-kāra); iti — thus; eka-akṣaram — the one syllable; brahma — absolute; vyāharan — vibrating; mām — Me (Kṛṣṇa); anusmaran — remembering; yaḥ — anyone who; prayāti — leaves; tyajan — quitting; deham — this body; saḥ — he; yāti — achieves; paramām — the supreme; gatim — destination.
Translation: After being situated in this yoga practice and vibrating the sacred syllable oṁ, the supreme combination of letters, if one thinks of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and quits his body, he will certainly reach the spiritual planets.

Chapter 8 Verse 14
Sanskrit: ananya-cetāḥ satataṁ yo māṁ smarati nityaśaḥ tasyāhaṁ su-labhaḥ pārtha nitya-yuktasya yoginaḥ
Transliteration: ananya-cetāḥ — without deviation of the mind; satatam — always; yaḥ — anyone who; mām — Me (Kṛṣṇa); smarati — remembers; nityaśaḥ — regularly; tasya — to him; aham — I am; su-labhaḥ — very easy to achieve; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; nitya — regularly; yuktasya — engaged; yoginaḥ — for the devotee.
Translation: For one who always remembers Me without deviation, I am easy to obtain, O son of Pṛthā, because of his constant engagement in devotional service.

Chapter 8 Verse 15
Sanskrit: mām upetya punar janma duḥkhālayam aśāśvatam nāpnuvanti mahātmānaḥ saṁsiddhiṁ paramāṁ gatāḥ
Transliteration: mām — Me; upetya — achieving; punaḥ — again; janma — birth; duḥkha-ālayam — place of miseries; aśāśvatam — temporary; na — never; āpnuvanti — attain; mahā-ātmānaḥ — the great souls; saṁsiddhim — perfection; paramām — ultimate; gatāḥ — having achieved.
Translation: After attaining Me, the great souls, who are yogīs in devotion, never return to this temporary world, which is full of miseries, because they have attained the highest perfection.

Chapter 8 Verse 16
Sanskrit: ā-brahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino ’rjuna mām upetya tu kaunteya punar janma na vidyate
Transliteration: ā-brahma-bhuvanāt — up to the Brahmaloka planet; lokāḥ — the planetary systems; punaḥ — again; āvartinaḥ — returning; arjuna — O Arjuna; mām — unto Me; upetya — arriving; tu — but; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; punaḥ janma — rebirth; na — never; vidyate — takes place.
Translation: From the highest planet in the material world down to the lowest, all are places of misery wherein repeated birth and death take place. But one who attains to My abode, O son of Kuntī, never takes birth again.

Chapter 8 Verse 17
Sanskrit: sahasra-yuga-paryantam ahar yad brahmaṇo viduḥ rātriṁ yuga-sahasrāntāṁ te ’ho-rātra-vido janāḥ
Transliteration: sahasra — one thousand; yuga — millenniums; paryantam — including; ahaḥ — day; yat — that which; brahmaṇaḥ — of Brahmā; viduḥ — they know; rātrim — night; yuga — millenniums; sahasra-antām — similarly, ending after one thousand; te — they; ahaḥ-rātra — day and night; vidaḥ — who understand; janāḥ — people.
Translation: By human calculation, a thousand ages taken together form the duration of Brahmā’s one day. And such also is the duration of his night.

Chapter 8 Verse 18
Sanskrit: avyaktād vyaktayaḥ sarvāḥ prabhavanty ahar-āgame rātry-āgame pralīyante tatraivāvyakta-saṁjñake
Transliteration: avyaktāt — from the unmanifest; vyaktayaḥ — living entities; sarvāḥ — all; prabhavanti — become manifest; ahaḥ-āgame — at the beginning of the day; rātri-āgame — at the fall of night; pralīyante — are annihilated; tatra — into that; eva — certainly; avyakta — the unmanifest; saṁjñake — which is called.
Translation: At the beginning of Brahmā’s day, all living entities become manifest from the unmanifest state, and thereafter, when the night falls, they are merged into the unmanifest again.

Chapter 8 Verse 19
Sanskrit: bhūta-grāmaḥ sa evāyaṁ bhūtvā bhūtvā pralīyate rātry-āgame ’vaśaḥ pārtha prabhavaty ahar-āgame
Transliteration: bhūta-grāmaḥ — the aggregate of all living entities; saḥ — these; eva — certainly; ayam — this; bhūtvā bhūtvā — repeatedly taking birth; pralīyate — is annihilated; rātri — of night; āgame — on the arrival; avaśaḥ — automatically; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; prabhavati — is manifest; ahaḥ — of daytime; āgame — on the arrival.
Translation: Again and again, when Brahmā’s day arrives, all living entities come into being, and with the arrival of Brahmā’s night they are helplessly annihilated.

Chapter 8 Verse 20
Sanskrit: paras tasmāt tu bhāvo ’nyo ’vyakto ’vyaktāt sanātanaḥ yaḥ sa sarveṣu bhūteṣu naśyatsu na vinaśyati
Transliteration: paraḥ — transcendental; tasmāt — to that; tu — but; bhāvaḥ — nature; anyaḥ — another; avyaktaḥ — unmanifest; avyaktāt — to the unmanifest; sanātanaḥ — eternal; yaḥ saḥ — that which; sarveṣu — all; bhūteṣu — manifestation; naśyatsu — being annihilated; na — never; vinaśyati — is annihilated.
Translation: Yet there is another unmanifest nature, which is eternal and is transcendental to this manifested and unmanifested matter. It is supreme and is never annihilated. When all in this world is annihilated, that part remains as it is.

Chapter 8 Verse 21
Sanskrit: avyakto ’kṣara ity uktas tam āhuḥ paramāṁ gatim yaṁ prāpya na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama
Transliteration: avyaktaḥ — unmanifested; akṣaraḥ — infallible; iti — thus; uktaḥ — is said; tam — that; āhuḥ — is known; paramām — the ultimate; gatim — destination; yam — which; prāpya — gaining; na — never; nivartante — come back; tat — that; dhāma — abode; paramam — supreme; mama — My.
Translation: That which the Vedāntists describe as unmanifest and infallible, that which is known as the supreme destination, that place from which, having attained it, one never returns – that is My supreme abode.

Chapter 8 Verse 22
Sanskrit: puruṣaḥ sa paraḥ pārtha bhaktyā labhyas tv ananyayā yasyāntaḥ-sthāni bhūtāni yena sarvam idaṁ tatam
Transliteration: puruṣaḥ — the Supreme Personality; saḥ — He; paraḥ — the Supreme, than whom no one is greater; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; bhaktyā — by devotional service; labhyaḥ — can be achieved; tu — but; ananyayā — unalloyed, undeviating; yasya — whom; antaḥ-sthāni — within; bhūtāni — all of this material manifestation; yena — by whom; sarvam — all; idam — whatever we can see; tatam — is pervaded.
Translation: The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is greater than all, is attainable by unalloyed devotion. Although He is present in His abode, He is all-pervading, and everything is situated within Him.

Chapter 8 Verse 23
Sanskrit: yatra kāle tv anāvṛttim āvṛttiṁ caiva yoginaḥ prayātā yānti taṁ kālaṁ vakṣyāmi bharatarṣabha
Transliteration: yatra — at which; kāle — time; tu — and; anāvṛttim — no return; āvṛttim — return; ca — also; eva — certainly; yoginaḥ — different kinds of mystics; prayātāḥ — having departed; yānti — attain; tam — that; kālam — time; vakṣyāmi — I shall describe; bharata-ṛṣabha — O best of the Bhāratas.
Translation: O best of the Bhāratas, I shall now explain to you the different times at which, passing away from this world, the yogī does or does not come back.

Chapter 8 Verse 24
Sanskrit: agnir jyotir ahaḥ śuklaḥ ṣaṇ-māsā uttarāyaṇam tatra prayātā gacchanti brahma brahma-vido janāḥ
Transliteration: agniḥ — fire; jyotiḥ — light; ahaḥ — day; śuklaḥ — the white fortnight; ṣaṭ-māsāḥ — the six months; uttara-ayanam — when the sun passes on the northern side; tatra — there; prayātāḥ — those who pass away; gacchanti — go; brahma — to the Absolute; brahma-vidaḥ — who know the Absolute; janāḥ — persons.
Translation: Those who know the Supreme Brahman attain that Supreme by passing away from the world during the influence of the fiery god, in the light, at an auspicious moment of the day, during the fortnight of the waxing moon, or during the six months when the sun travels in the north.

Chapter 8 Verse 25
Sanskrit: dhūmo rātris tathā kṛṣṇaḥ ṣaṇ-māsā dakṣiṇāyanam tatra cāndramasaṁ jyotir yogī prāpya nivartate
Transliteration: dhūmaḥ — smoke; rātriḥ — night; tathā — also; kṛṣṇaḥ — the fortnight of the dark moon; ṣaṭ-māsāḥ — the six months; dakṣiṇa-ayanam — when the sun passes on the southern side; tatra — there; cāndramasam — the moon planet; jyotiḥ — the light; yogī — the mystic; prāpya — achieving; nivartate — comes back.
Translation: The mystic who passes away from this world during the smoke, the night, the fortnight of the waning moon, or the six months when the sun passes to the south reaches the moon planet but again comes back.

Chapter 8 Verse 26
Sanskrit: śukla-kṛṣṇe gatī hy ete jagataḥ śāśvate mate ekayā yāty anāvṛttim anyayāvartate punaḥ
Transliteration: śukla — light; kṛṣṇe — and darkness; gatī — ways of passing; hi — certainly; ete — these two; jagataḥ — of the material world; śāśvate — of the Vedas; mate — in the opinion; ekayā — by one; yāti — goes; anāvṛttim — to no return; anyayā — by the other; āvartate — comes back; punaḥ — again.
Translation: According to Vedic opinion, there are two ways of passing from this world – one in light and one in darkness. When one passes in light, he does not come back; but when one passes in darkness, he returns.

Chapter 8 Verse 27
Sanskrit: naite sṛtī pārtha jānan yogī muhyati kaścana tasmāt sarveṣu kāleṣu yoga-yukto bhavārjuna
Transliteration: na — never; ete — these two; sṛtī — different paths; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; jānan — even if he knows; yogī — the devotee of the Lord; muhyati — is bewildered; kaścana — any; tasmāt — therefore; sarveṣu kāleṣu — always; yoga-yuktaḥ — engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness; bhava — just become; arjuna — O Arjuna.
Translation: Although the devotees know these two paths, O Arjuna, they are never bewildered. Therefore be always fixed in devotion.

Chapter 8 Verse 28
Sanskrit: vedeṣu yajñeṣu tapaḥsu caiva dāneṣu yat puṇya-phalaṁ pradiṣṭam atyeti tat sarvam idaṁ viditvā yogī paraṁ sthānam upaiti cādyam
Transliteration: vedeṣu — in the study of the Vedas; yajñeṣu — in the performances of yajña, sacrifice; tapaḥsu — in undergoing different types of austerities; ca — also; eva — certainly; dāneṣu — in giving charities; yat — that which; puṇya-phalam — result of pious work; pradiṣṭam — indicated; atyeti — surpasses; tat sarvam — all those; idam — this; viditvā — knowing; yogī — the devotee; param — supreme; sthānam — abode; upaiti — achieves; ca — also; ādyam — original.
Translation: A person who accepts the path of devotional service is not bereft of the results derived from studying the Vedas, performing sacrifices, undergoing austerities, giving charity or pursuing philosophical and fruitive activities. Simply by performing devotional service, he attains all these, and at the end he reaches the supreme eternal abode.
