Chapter 10 Verse 1
Sanskrit: śrī-bhagavān uvāca bhūya eva mahā-bāho śṛṇu me paramaṁ vacaḥ yat te ’haṁ prīyamāṇāya vakṣyāmi hita-kāmyayā
Transliteration: śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; bhūyaḥ — again; eva — certainly; mahā-bāho — O mighty-armed; śṛṇu — just hear; me — My; paramam — supreme; vacaḥ — instruction; yat — that which; te — to you; aham — I; prīyamāṇāya — thinking you dear to Me; vakṣyāmi — say; hita-kāmyayā — for your benefit.
Translation: The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Listen again, O mighty-armed Arjuna. Because you are My dear friend, for your benefit I shall speak to you further, giving knowledge that is better than what I have already explained.

Chapter 10 Verse 2
Sanskrit: na me viduḥ sura-gaṇāḥ prabhavaṁ na maharṣayaḥ aham ādir hi devānāṁ maharṣīṇāṁ ca sarvaśaḥ
Transliteration: na — never; me — My; viduḥ — know; sura-gaṇāḥ — the demigods; prabhavam — origin, opulences; na — never; mahā-ṛṣayaḥ — great sages; aham — I am; ādiḥ — the origin; hi — certainly; devānām — of the demigods; mahā-ṛṣīṇām — of the great sages; ca — also; sarvaśaḥ — in all respects.
Translation: Neither the hosts of demigods nor the great sages know My origin or opulences, for, in every respect, I am the source of the demigods and sages.

Chapter 10 Verse 3
Sanskrit: yo mām ajam anādiṁ ca vetti loka-maheśvaram asammūḍhaḥ sa martyeṣu sarva-pāpaiḥ pramucyate
Transliteration: yaḥ — anyone who; mām — Me; ajam — unborn; anādim — without beginning; ca — also; vetti — knows; loka — of the planets; mahā-īśvaram — the supreme master; asammūḍhaḥ — undeluded; saḥ — he; martyeṣu — among those subject to death; sarva-pāpaiḥ — from all sinful reactions; pramucyate — is delivered.
Translation: He who knows Me as the unborn, as the beginningless, as the Supreme Lord of all the worlds – he only, undeluded among men, is freed from all sins.

Chapter 10 Verse 6
Sanskrit: maharṣayaḥ sapta pūrve catvāro manavas tathā mad-bhāvā mānasā jātā yeṣāṁ loka imāḥ prajāḥ
Transliteration: mahā-ṛṣayaḥ — the great sages; sapta — seven; pūrve — before; catvāraḥ — four; manavaḥ — Manus; tathā — also; mat-bhāvāḥ — born of Me; mānasāḥ — from the mind; jātāḥ — born; yeṣām — of them; loke — in the world; imāḥ — all this; prajāḥ — population.
Translation: The seven great sages and before them the four other great sages and the Manus [progenitors of mankind] come from Me, born from My mind, and all the living beings populating the various planets descend from them.

Chapter 10 Verse 7
Sanskrit: etāṁ vibhūtiṁ yogaṁ ca mama yo vetti tattvataḥ so ’vikalpena yogena yujyate nātra saṁśayaḥ
Transliteration: etām — all this; vibhūtim — opulence; yogam — mystic power; ca — also; mama — of Mine; yaḥ — anyone who; vetti — knows; tattvataḥ — factually; saḥ — he; avikalpena — without division; yogena — in devotional service; yujyate — is engaged; na — never; atra — here; saṁśayaḥ — doubt.
Translation: One who is factually convinced of this opulence and mystic power of Mine engages in unalloyed devotional service; of this there is no doubt.

Chapter 10 Verse 8
Sanskrit: ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate iti matvā bhajante māṁ budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ
Transliteration: aham — I; sarvasya — of all; prabhavaḥ — the source of generation; mattaḥ — from Me; sarvam — everything; pravartate — emanates; iti — thus; matvā — knowing; bhajante — become devoted; mām — unto Me; budhāḥ — the learned; bhāva-samanvitāḥ — with great attention.
Translation: I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything emanates from Me. The wise who perfectly know this engage in My devotional service and worship Me with all their hearts.

Chapter 10 Verse 9
Sanskrit: mac-cittā mad-gata-prāṇā bodhayantaḥ parasparam kathayantaś ca māṁ nityaṁ tuṣyanti ca ramanti ca
Transliteration: mat-cittāḥ — their minds fully engaged in Me; mat-gata-prāṇāḥ — their lives devoted to Me; bodhayantaḥ — preaching; parasparam — among themselves; kathayantaḥ — talking; ca — also; mām — about Me; nityam — perpetually; tuṣyanti — become pleased; ca — also; ramanti — enjoy transcendental bliss; ca — also.
Translation: The thoughts of My pure devotees dwell in Me, their lives are fully devoted to My service, and they derive great satisfaction and bliss from always enlightening one another and conversing about Me.

Chapter 10 Verse 10
Sanskrit: teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ yena mām upayānti te
Transliteration: teṣām — unto them; satata-yuktānām — always engaged; bhajatām — in rendering devotional service; prīti-pūrvakam — in loving ecstasy; dadāmi — I give; buddhi-yogam — real intelligence; tam — that; yena — by which; mām — unto Me; upayānti — come; te — they.
Translation: To those who are constantly devoted to serving Me with love, I give the understanding by which they can come to Me.

Chapter 10 Verse 11
Sanskrit: teṣām evānukampārtham aham ajñāna-jaṁ tamaḥ nāśayāmy ātma-bhāva-stho jñāna-dīpena bhāsvatā
Transliteration: teṣām — for them; eva — certainly; anukampā-artham — to show special mercy; aham — I; ajñāna-jam — due to ignorance; tamaḥ — darkness; nāśayāmi — dispel; ātma-bhāva — within their hearts; sthaḥ — situated; jñāna — of knowledge; dīpena — with the lamp; bhāsvatā — glowing.
Translation: To show them special mercy, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy with the shining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of ignorance.

Chapter 10 Verse 14
Sanskrit: sarvam etad ṛtaṁ manye yan māṁ vadasi keśava na hi te bhagavan vyaktiṁ vidur devā na dānavāḥ
Transliteration: sarvam — all; etat — this; ṛtam — truth; manye — I accept; yat — which; mām — unto me; vadasi — You tell; keśava — O Kṛṣṇa; na — never; hi — certainly; te — Your; bhagavan — O Personality of Godhead; vyaktim — revelation; viduḥ — can know; devāḥ — the demigods; na — nor; dānavāḥ — the demons.
Translation: O Kṛṣṇa, I totally accept as truth all that You have told me. Neither the demigods nor the demons, O Lord, can understand Your personality.

Chapter 10 Verse 15
Sanskrit: svayam evātmanātmānaṁ vettha tvaṁ puruṣottama bhūta-bhāvana bhūteśa deva-deva jagat-pate
Transliteration: svayam — personally; eva — certainly; ātmanā — by Yourself; ātmānam — Yourself; vettha — know; tvam — You; puruṣa-uttama — O greatest of all persons; bhūta-bhāvana — O origin of everything; bhūta-īśa — O Lord of everything; deva-deva — O Lord of all demigods; jagat-pate — O Lord of the entire universe.
Translation: Indeed, You alone know Yourself by Your own internal potency, O Supreme Person, origin of all, Lord of all beings, God of gods, Lord of the universe!

Chapter 10 Verse 16
Sanskrit: vaktum arhasy aśeṣeṇa divyā hy ātma-vibhūtayaḥ yābhir vibhūtibhir lokān imāṁs tvaṁ vyāpya tiṣṭhasi
Transliteration: vaktum — to say; arhasi — You deserve; aśeṣeṇa — in detail; divyāḥ — divine; hi — certainly; ātma — Your own; vibhūtayaḥ — opulences; yābhiḥ — by which; vibhūtibhiḥ — opulences; lokān — all the planets; imān — these; tvam — You; vyāpya — pervading; tiṣṭhasi — remain.
Translation: Please tell me in detail of Your divine opulences by which You pervade all these worlds.

Chapter 10 Verse 17
Sanskrit: kathaṁ vidyām ahaṁ yogiṁs tvāṁ sadā paricintayan keṣu keṣu ca bhāveṣu cintyo ’si bhagavan mayā
Transliteration: katham — how; vidyām aham — shall I know; yogin — O supreme mystic; tvām — You; sadā — always; paricintayan — thinking of; keṣu — in which; keṣu — in which; ca — also; bhāveṣu — natures; cintyaḥ asi — You are to be remembered; bhagavan — O Supreme; mayā — by me.
Translation: O Kṛṣṇa, O supreme mystic, how shall I constantly think of You, and how shall I know You? In what various forms are You to be remembered, O Supreme Personality of Godhead?

Chapter 10 Verse 18
Sanskrit: vistareṇātmano yogaṁ vibhūtiṁ ca janārdana bhūyaḥ kathaya tṛptir hi śṛṇvato nāsti me ’mṛtam
Transliteration: vistareṇa — in detail; ātmanaḥ — Your; yogam — mystic power; vibhūtim — opulences; ca — also; jana-ardana — O killer of the atheists; bhūyaḥ — again; kathaya — describe; tṛptiḥ — satisfaction; hi — certainly; śṛṇvataḥ — hearing; na asti — there is not; me — my; amṛtam — nectar.
Translation: O Janārdana, again please describe in detail the mystic power of Your opulences. I am never satiated in hearing about You, for the more I hear the more I want to taste the nectar of Your words.

Chapter 10 Verse 19
Sanskrit: śrī-bhagavān uvāca hanta te kathayiṣyāmi divyā hy ātma-vibhūtayaḥ prādhānyataḥ kuru-śreṣṭha nāsty anto vistarasya me
Transliteration: śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; hanta — yes; te — unto you; kathayiṣyāmi — I shall speak; divyāḥ — divine; hi — certainly; ātma-vibhūtayaḥ — personal opulences; prādhānyataḥ — which are principal; kuru-śreṣṭha — O best of the Kurus; na asti — there is not; antaḥ — limit; vistarasya — to the extent; me — My.
Translation: The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Yes, I will tell you of My splendorous manifestations, but only of those which are prominent, O Arjuna, for My opulence is limitless.

Chapter 10 Verse 20
Sanskrit: aham ātmā guḍākeśa sarva-bhūtāśaya-sthitaḥ aham ādiś ca madhyaṁ ca bhūtānām anta eva ca
Transliteration: aham — I; ātmā — the soul; guḍākeśa — O Arjuna; sarva-bhūta — of all living entities; āśaya-sthitaḥ — situated within the heart; aham — I am; ādiḥ — the origin; ca — also; madhyam — middle; ca — also; bhūtānām — of all living entities; antaḥ — end; eva — certainly; ca — and.
Translation: I am the Supersoul, O Arjuna, seated in the hearts of all living entities. I am the beginning, the middle and the end of all beings.

Chapter 10 Verse 21
Sanskrit: ādityānām ahaṁ viṣṇur jyotiṣāṁ ravir aṁśumān marīcir marutām asmi nakṣatrāṇām ahaṁ śaśī
Transliteration: ādityānām — of the Ādityas; aham — I am; viṣṇuḥ — the Supreme Lord; jyotiṣām — of all luminaries; raviḥ — the sun; aṁśu-mān — radiant; marīciḥ — Marīci; marutām — of the Maruts; asmi — I am; nakṣatrāṇām — of the stars; aham — I am; śaśī — the moon.
Translation: Of the Ādityas I am Viṣṇu, of lights I am the radiant sun, of the Maruts I am Marīci, and among the stars I am the moon.

Chapter 10 Verse 22
Sanskrit: vedānāṁ sāma-vedo ’smi devānām asmi vāsavaḥ indriyāṇāṁ manaś cāsmi bhūtānām asmi cetanā
Transliteration: vedānām — of all the Vedas; sāma-vedaḥ — the Sāma Veda; asmi — I am; devānām — of all the demigods; asmi — I am; vāsavaḥ — the heavenly king; indriyāṇām — of all the senses; manaḥ — the mind; ca — also; asmi — I am; bhūtānām — of all living entities; asmi — I am; cetanā — the living force.
Translation: Of the Vedas I am the Sāma Veda; of the demigods I am Indra, the king of heaven; of the senses I am the mind; and in living beings I am the living force [consciousness].

Chapter 10 Verse 23
Sanskrit: rudrāṇāṁ śaṅkaraś cāsmi vitteśo yakṣa-rakṣasām vasūnāṁ pāvakaś cāsmi meruḥ śikhariṇām aham
Transliteration: rudrāṇām — of all the Rudras; śaṅkaraḥ — Lord Śiva; ca — also; asmi — I am; vitta-īśaḥ — the lord of the treasury of the demigods; yakṣa-rakṣasām — of the Yakṣas and Rākṣasas; vasūnām — of the Vasus; pāvakaḥ — fire; ca — also; asmi — I am; meruḥ — Meru; śikhariṇām — of all mountains; aham — I am.
Translation: Of all the Rudras I am Lord Śiva, of the Yakṣas and Rākṣasas I am the Lord of wealth [Kuvera], of the Vasus I am fire [Agni], and of mountains I am Meru.

Chapter 10 Verse 24
Sanskrit: purodhasāṁ ca mukhyaṁ māṁ viddhi pārtha bṛhaspatim senānīnām ahaṁ skandaḥ sarasām asmi sāgaraḥ
Transliteration: purodhasām — of all priests; ca — also; mukhyam — the chief; mām — Me; viddhi — understand; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; bṛhaspatim — Bṛhaspati; senānīnām — of all commanders; aham — I am; skandaḥ — Kārttikeya; sarasām — of all reservoirs of water; asmi — I am; sāgaraḥ — the ocean.
Translation: Of priests, O Arjuna, know Me to be the chief, Bṛhaspati. Of generals I am Kārttikeya, and of bodies of water I am the ocean.

Chapter 10 Verse 25
Sanskrit: maharṣīṇāṁ bhṛgur ahaṁ girām asmy ekam akṣaram yajñānāṁ japa-yajño ’smi sthāvarāṇāṁ himālayaḥ
Transliteration: mahā-ṛṣīṇām — among the great sages; bhṛguḥ — Bhṛgu; aham — I am; girām — of vibrations; asmi — I am; ekam akṣaram — praṇava; yajñānām — of sacrifices; japa-yajñaḥ — chanting; asmi — I am; sthāvarāṇām — of immovable things; himālayaḥ — the Himālayan mountains.
Translation: Of the great sages I am Bhṛgu; of vibrations I am the transcendental oṁ. Of sacrifices I am the chanting of the holy names [japa], and of immovable things I am the Himālayas.

Chapter 10 Verse 26
Sanskrit: aśvatthaḥ sarva-vṛkṣāṇāṁ devarṣīṇāṁ ca nāradaḥ gandharvāṇāṁ citrarathaḥ siddhānāṁ kapilo muniḥ
Transliteration: aśvatthaḥ — the banyan tree; sarva-vṛkṣāṇām — of all trees; deva-ṛṣīṇām — of all the sages amongst the demigods; ca — and; nāradaḥ — Nārada; gandharvāṇām — of the citizens of the Gandharva planet; citrarathaḥ — Citraratha; siddhānām — of all those who are perfected; kapilaḥ muniḥ — Kapila Muni.
Translation: Of all trees I am the banyan tree, and of the sages among the demigods I am Nārada. Of the Gandharvas I am Citraratha, and among perfected beings I am the sage Kapila.

Chapter 10 Verse 27
Sanskrit: uccaiḥśravasam aśvānāṁ viddhi mām amṛtodbhavam airāvataṁ gajendrāṇāṁ narāṇāṁ ca narādhipam
Transliteration: uccaiḥśravasam — Uccaiḥśravā; aśvānām — among horses; viddhi — know; mām — Me; amṛta-udbhavam — produced from the churning of the ocean; airāvatam — Airāvata; gaja-indrāṇām — of lordly elephants; narāṇām — among human beings; ca — and; nara-adhipam — the king.
Translation: Of horses know Me to be Uccaiḥśravā, produced during the churning of the ocean for nectar. Of lordly elephants I am Airāvata, and among men I am the monarch.

Chapter 10 Verse 28
Sanskrit: āyudhānām ahaṁ vajraṁ dhenūnām asmi kāma-dhuk prajanaś cāsmi kandarpaḥ sarpāṇām asmi vāsukiḥ
Transliteration: āyudhānām — of all weapons; aham — I am; vajram — the thunderbolt; dhenūnām — of cows; asmi — I am; kāma-dhuk — the surabhi cow; prajanaḥ — the cause for begetting children; ca — and; asmi — I am; kandarpaḥ — Cupid; sarpāṇām — of serpents; asmi — I am; vāsukiḥ — Vāsuki.
Translation: Of weapons I am the thunderbolt; among cows I am the surabhi. Of causes for procreation I am Kandarpa, the god of love, and of serpents I am Vāsuki.

Chapter 10 Verse 29
Sanskrit: anantaś cāsmi nāgānāṁ varuṇo yādasām aham pitṝṇām aryamā cāsmi yamaḥ saṁyamatām aham
Transliteration: anantaḥ — Ananta; ca — also; asmi — I am; nāgānām — of the many-hooded serpents; varuṇaḥ — the demigod controlling the water; yādasām — of all aquatics; aham — I am; pitṝṇām — of the ancestors; aryamā — Aryamā; ca — also; asmi — I am; yamaḥ — the controller of death; saṁyamatām — of all regulators; aham — I am.
Translation: Of the many-hooded Nāgas I am Ananta, and among the aquatics I am the demigod Varuṇa. Of departed ancestors I am Aryamā, and among the dispensers of law I am Yama, the lord of death.

Chapter 10 Verse 30
Sanskrit: prahlādaś cāsmi daityānāṁ kālaḥ kalayatām aham mṛgāṇāṁ ca mṛgendro ’haṁ vainateyaś ca pakṣiṇām
Transliteration: prahlādaḥ — Prahlāda; ca — also; asmi — I am; daityānām — of the demons; kālaḥ — time; kalayatām — of subduers; aham — I am; mṛgāṇām — of animals; ca — and; mṛga-indraḥ — the lion; aham — I am; vainateyaḥ — Garuḍa; ca — also; pakṣiṇām — of birds.
Translation: Among the Daitya demons I am the devoted Prahlāda, among subduers I am time, among beasts I am the lion, and among birds I am Garuḍa.

Chapter 10 Verse 31
Sanskrit: pavanaḥ pavatām asmi rāmaḥ śastra-bhṛtām aham jhaṣāṇāṁ makaraś cāsmi srotasām asmi jāhnavī
Transliteration: pavanaḥ — the wind; pavatām — of all that purifies; asmi — I am; rāmaḥ — Rāma; śastra-bhṛtām — of the carriers of weapons; aham — I am; jhaṣāṇām — of all fish; makaraḥ — the shark; ca — also; asmi — I am; srotasām — of flowing rivers; asmi — I am; jāhnavī — the river Ganges.
Translation: Of purifiers I am the wind, of the wielders of weapons I am Rāma, of fishes I am the shark, and of flowing rivers I am the Ganges.

Chapter 10 Verse 32
Sanskrit: sargāṇām ādir antaś ca madhyaṁ caivāham arjuna adhyātma-vidyā vidyānāṁ vādaḥ pravadatām aham
Transliteration: sargāṇām — of all creations; ādiḥ — the beginning; antaḥ — end; ca — and; madhyam — middle; ca — also; eva — certainly; aham — I am; arjuna — O Arjuna; adhyātma-vidyā — spiritual knowledge; vidyānām — of all education; vādaḥ — the natural conclusion; pravadatām — of arguments; aham — I am.
Translation: Of all creations I am the beginning and the end and also the middle, O Arjuna. Of all sciences I am the spiritual science of the self, and among logicians I am the conclusive truth.

Chapter 10 Verse 33
Sanskrit: akṣarāṇām a-kāro ’smi dvandvaḥ sāmāsikasya ca aham evākṣayaḥ kālo dhātāhaṁ viśvato-mukhaḥ
Transliteration: akṣarāṇām — of letters; a-kāraḥ — the first letter; asmi — I am; dvandvaḥ — the dual; sāmāsikasya — of compounds; ca — and; aham — I am; eva — certainly; akṣayaḥ — eternal; kālaḥ — time; dhātā — the creator; aham — I am; viśvataḥ-mukhaḥ — Brahmā.
Translation: Of letters I am the letter A, and among compound words I am the dual compound. I am also inexhaustible time, and of creators I am Brahmā.

Chapter 10 Verse 34
Sanskrit: mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham udbhavaś ca bhaviṣyatām kīrtiḥ śrīr vāk ca nārīṇāṁ smṛtir medhā dhṛtiḥ kṣamā
Transliteration: mṛtyuḥ — death; sarva-haraḥ — all-devouring; ca — also; aham — I am; udbhavaḥ — generation; ca — also; bhaviṣyatām — of future manifestations; kīrtiḥ — fame; śrīḥ — opulence or beauty; vāk — fine speech; ca — also; nārīṇām — of women; smṛtiḥ — memory; medhā — intelligence; dhṛtiḥ — firmness; kṣamā — patience.
Translation: I am all-devouring death, and I am the generating principle of all that is yet to be. Among women I am fame, fortune, fine speech, memory, intelligence, steadfastness and patience.

Chapter 10 Verse 35
Sanskrit: bṛhat-sāma tathā sāmnāṁ gāyatrī chandasām aham māsānāṁ mārga-śīrṣo ’ham ṛtūnāṁ kusumākaraḥ
Transliteration: bṛhat-sāma — the Bṛhat-sāma; tathā — also; sāmnām — of the Sāma Veda songs; gāyatrī — the Gāyatrī hymns; chandasām — of all poetry; aham — I am; māsānām — of months; mārga-śīrṣaḥ — the month of November-December; aham — I am; ṛtūnām — of all seasons; kusuma-ākaraḥ — spring.
Translation: Of the hymns in the Sāma Veda I am the Bṛhat-sāma, and of poetry I am the Gāyatrī. Of months I am Mārgaśīrṣa [November-December], and of seasons I am flower-bearing spring.

Chapter 10 Verse 36
Sanskrit: dyūtaṁ chalayatām asmi tejas tejasvinām aham jayo ’smi vyavasāyo ’smi sattvaṁ sattvavatām aham
Transliteration: dyūtam — gambling; chalayatām — of all cheats; asmi — I am; tejaḥ — the splendor; tejasvinām — of everything splendid; aham — I am; jayaḥ — victory; asmi — I am; vyavasāyaḥ — enterprise or adventure; asmi — I am; sattvam — the strength; sattva-vatām — of the strong; aham — I am.
Translation: I am also the gambling of cheats, and of the splendid I am the splendor. I am victory, I am adventure, and I am the strength of the strong.

Chapter 10 Verse 37
Sanskrit: vṛṣṇīnāṁ vāsudevo ’smi pāṇḍavānāṁ dhanañ-jayaḥ munīnām apy ahaṁ vyāsaḥ kavīnām uśanā kaviḥ
Transliteration: vṛṣṇīnām — of the descendants of Vṛṣṇi; vāsudevaḥ — Kṛṣṇa in Dvārakā; asmi — I am; pāṇḍavānām — of the Pāṇḍavas; dhanam-jayaḥ — Arjuna; munīnām — of the sages; api — also; aham — I am; vyāsaḥ — Vyāsa, the compiler of all Vedic literature; kavīnām — of all great thinkers; uśanā — Uśanā; kaviḥ — the thinker.
Translation: Of the descendants of Vṛṣṇi I am Vāsudeva, and of the Pāṇḍavas I am Arjuna. Of the sages I am Vyāsa, and among great thinkers I am Uśanā.

Chapter 10 Verse 38
Sanskrit: daṇḍo damayatām asmi nītir asmi jigīṣatām maunaṁ caivāsmi guhyānāṁ jñānaṁ jñānavatām aham
Transliteration: daṇḍaḥ — punishment; damayatām — of all means of suppression; asmi — I am; nītiḥ — morality; asmi — I am; jigīṣatām — of those who seek victory; maunam — silence; ca — and; eva — also; asmi — I am; guhyānām — of secrets; jñānam — knowledge; jñāna-vatām — of the wise; aham — I am.
Translation: Among all means of suppressing lawlessness I am punishment, and of those who seek victory I am morality. Of secret things I am silence, and of the wise I am the wisdom.

Chapter 10 Verse 39
Sanskrit: yac cāpi sarva-bhūtānāṁ bījaṁ tad aham arjuna na tad asti vinā yat syān mayā bhūtaṁ carācaram
Transliteration: yat — whatever; ca — also; api — may be; sarva-bhūtānām — of all creations; bījam — seed; tat — that; aham — I am; arjuna — O Arjuna; na — not; tat — that; asti — there is; vinā — without; yat — which; syāt — exists; mayā — Me; bhūtam — created being; cara-acaram — moving and nonmoving.
Translation: Furthermore, O Arjuna, I am the generating seed of all existences. There is no being – moving or nonmoving – that can exist without Me.

Chapter 10 Verse 40
Sanskrit: nānto ’sti mama divyānāṁ vibhūtīnāṁ paran-tapa eṣa tūddeśataḥ prokto vibhūter vistaro mayā
Transliteration: na — nor; antaḥ — a limit; asti — there is; mama — My; divyānām — of the divine; vibhūtīnām — opulences; param-tapa — O conqueror of the enemies; eṣaḥ — all this; tu — but; uddeśataḥ — as examples; proktaḥ — spoken; vibhūteḥ — of opulences; vistaraḥ — the expanse; mayā — by Me.
Translation: O mighty conqueror of enemies, there is no end to My divine manifestations. What I have spoken to you is but a mere indication of My infinite opulences.

Chapter 10 Verse 41
Sanskrit: yad yad vibhūtimat sattvaṁ śrīmad ūrjitam eva vā tat tad evāvagaccha tvaṁ mama tejo-’ṁśa-sambhavam
Transliteration: yat yat — whatever; vibhūti — opulences; mat — having; sattvam — existence; śrī-mat — beautiful; ūrjitam — glorious; eva — certainly; vā — or; tat tat — all those; eva — certainly; avagaccha — must know; tvam — you; mama — My; tejaḥ — of the splendor; aṁśa — a part; sambhavam — born of.
Translation: Know that all opulent, beautiful and glorious creations spring from but a spark of My splendor.

Chapter 10 Verse 42
Sanskrit: atha vā bahunaitena kiṁ jñātena tavārjuna viṣṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛtsnam ekāṁśena sthito jagat
Transliteration: atha vā — or; bahunā — many; etena — by this kind; kim — what; jñātena — by knowing; tava — your; arjuna — O Arjuna; viṣṭabhya — pervading; aham — I; idam — this; kṛtsnam — entire; eka — by one; aṁśena — part; sthitaḥ — am situated; jagat — universe.
Translation: But what need is there, Arjuna, for all this detailed knowledge? With a single fragment of Myself I pervade and support this entire universe.
