Chapter 11 Verse 1
Sanskrit: arjuna uvāca mad-anugrahāya paramaṁ guhyam adhyātma-saṁjñitam yat tvayoktaṁ vacas tena moho ’yaṁ vigato mama
Transliteration: arjunaḥ uvāca — Arjuna said; mat-anugrahāya — just to show me favor; paramam — supreme; guhyam — confidential subject; adhyātma — spiritual; saṁjñitam — in the matter of; yat — what; tvayā — by You; uktam — said; vacaḥ — words; tena — by that; mohaḥ — illusion; ayam — this; vigataḥ — is removed; mama — my.
Translation: Arjuna said: By my hearing the instructions You have kindly given me about these most confidential spiritual subjects, my illusion has now been dispelled.

Chapter 11 Verse 2
Sanskrit: bhavāpyayau hi bhūtānāṁ śrutau vistaraśo mayā tvattaḥ kamala-patrākṣa māhātmyam api cāvyayam
Transliteration: bhava — appearance; apyayau — disappearance; hi — certainly; bhūtānām — of all living entities; śrutau — have been heard; vistaraśaḥ — in detail; mayā — by me; tvattaḥ — from You; kamala-patra-akṣa — O lotus-eyed one; māhātmyam — glories; api — also; ca — and; avyayam — inexhaustible.
Translation: O lotus-eyed one, I have heard from You in detail about the appearance and disappearance of every living entity and have realized Your inexhaustible glories.

Chapter 11 Verse 3
Sanskrit: evam etad yathāttha tvam ātmānaṁ parameśvara draṣṭum icchāmi te rūpam aiśvaraṁ puruṣottama
Transliteration: evam — thus; etat — this; yathā — as it is; āttha — have spoken; tvam — You; ātmānam — Yourself; parama-īśvara — O Supreme Lord; draṣṭum — to see; icchāmi — I wish; te — Your; rūpam — form; aiśvaram — divine; puruṣa-uttama — O best of personalities.
Translation: O greatest of all personalities, O supreme form, though I see You here before me in Your actual position, as You have described Yourself, I wish to see how You have entered into this cosmic manifestation. I want to see that form of Yours.

Chapter 11 Verse 4
Sanskrit: manyase yadi tac chakyaṁ mayā draṣṭum iti prabho yogeśvara tato me tvaṁ darśayātmānam avyayam
Transliteration: manyase — You think; yadi — if; tat — that; śakyam — is able; mayā — by me; draṣṭum — to be seen; iti — thus; prabho — O Lord; yoga-īśvara — O Lord of all mystic power; tataḥ — then; me — unto me; tvam — You; darśaya — show; ātmānam — Your Self; avyayam — eternal.
Translation: If You think that I am able to behold Your cosmic form, O my Lord, O master of all mystic power, then kindly show me that unlimited universal Self.

Chapter 11 Verse 5
Sanskrit: śrī-bhagavān uvāca paśya me pārtha rūpāṇi śataśo ’tha sahasraśaḥ nānā-vidhāni divyāni nānā-varṇākṛtīni ca
Transliteration: śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; paśya — just see; me — My; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; rūpāṇi — forms; śataśaḥ — hundreds; atha — also; sahasraśaḥ — thousands; nānā-vidhāni — variegated; divyāni — divine; nānā — variegated; varṇa — colors; ākṛtīni — forms; ca — also.
Translation: The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, O son of Pṛthā, see now My opulences, hundreds of thousands of varied divine and multicolored forms.

Chapter 11 Verse 6
Sanskrit: paśyādityān vasūn rudrān aśvinau marutas tathā bahūny adṛṣṭa-pūrvāṇi paśyāścaryāṇi bhārata
Transliteration: paśya — see; ādityān — the twelve sons of Aditi; vasūn — the eight Vasus; rudrān — the eleven forms of Rudra; aśvinau — the two Aśvinīs; marutaḥ — the forty-nine Maruts (demigods of the wind); tathā — also; bahūni — many; adṛṣṭa — that you have not seen; pūrvāṇi — before; paśya — see; āścaryāṇi — all the wonders; bhārata — O best of the Bhāratas.
Translation: O best of the Bhāratas, see here the different manifestations of Ādityas, Vasus, Rudras, Aśvinī-kumāras and all the other demigods. Behold the many wonderful things which no one has ever seen or heard of before.

Chapter 11 Verse 7
Sanskrit: ihaika-sthaṁ jagat kṛtsnaṁ paśyādya sa-carācaram mama dehe guḍākeśa yac cānyad draṣṭum icchasi
Transliteration: iha — in this; eka-stham — in one place; jagat — the universe; kṛtsnam — completely; paśya — see; adya — immediately; sa — with; cara — the moving; acaram — and not moving; mama — My; dehe — in this body; guḍākeśa — O Arjuna; yat — that which; ca — also; anyat — other; draṣṭum — to see; icchasi — you wish.
Translation: O Arjuna, whatever you wish to see, behold at once in this body of Mine! This universal form can show you whatever you now desire to see and whatever you may want to see in the future. Everything – moving and nonmoving – is here completely, in one place.

Chapter 11 Verse 8
Sanskrit: na tu māṁ śakyase draṣṭum anenaiva sva-cakṣuṣā divyaṁ dadāmi te cakṣuḥ paśya me yogam aiśvaram
Transliteration: na — never; tu — but; mām — Me; śakyase — are able; draṣṭum — to see; anena — with these; eva — certainly; sva-cakṣuṣā — your own eyes; divyam — divine; dadāmi — I give; te — to you; cakṣuḥ — eyes; paśya — see; me — My; yogam aiśvaram — inconceivable mystic power.
Translation: But you cannot see Me with your present eyes. Therefore I give you divine eyes. Behold My mystic opulence!

Chapter 11 Verse 9
Sanskrit: sañjaya uvāca evam uktvā tato rājan mahā-yogeśvaro hariḥ darśayām āsa pārthāya paramaṁ rūpam aiśvaram
Transliteration: sañjayaḥ uvāca — Sañjaya said; evam — thus; uktvā — saying; tataḥ — thereafter; rājan — O King; mahā-yoga-īśvaraḥ — the most powerful mystic; hariḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa; darśayām āsa — showed; pārthāya — unto Arjuna; paramam — the divine; rūpam aiśvaram — universal form.
Translation: Sañjaya said: O King, having spoken thus, the Supreme Lord of all mystic power, the Personality of Godhead, displayed His universal form to Arjuna. TEXTS 10-11 aneka-vaktra-nayanam anekādbhuta-darśanam aneka-divyābharaṇaṁ divyānekodyatāyudham divya-mālyāmbara-dharaṁ divya-gandhānulepanam sarvāścarya-mayaṁ devam anantaṁ viśvato-mukham Synonyms aneka — various; vaktra — mouths; nayanam — eyes; aneka — various; adbhuta — wonderful; darśanam — sights; aneka — many; divya — divine; ābharaṇam — ornaments; divya — divine; aneka — various; udyata — uplifted; āyudham — weapons; divya — divine; mālya — garlands; ambara — dresses; dharam — wearing; divya — divine; gandha — fragrances; anulepanam — smeared with; sarva — all; āścarya-mayam — wonderful; devam — shining; anantam — unlimited; viśvataḥ-mukham — all-pervading. Translation Arjuna saw in that universal form unlimited mouths, unlimited eyes, unlimited wonderful visions. The form was decorated with many celestial ornaments and bore many divine upraised weapons. He wore celestial garlands and garments, and many divine scents were smeared over His body. All was wondrous, brilliant, unlimited, all-expanding.

Chapter 11 Verse 12
Sanskrit: divi sūrya-sahasrasya bhaved yugapad utthitā yadi bhāḥ sadṛśī sā syād bhāsas tasya mahātmanaḥ
Transliteration: divi — in the sky; sūrya — of suns; sahasrasya — of many thousands; bhavet — there were; yugapat — simultaneously; utthitā — present; yadi — if; bhāḥ — light; sadṛśī — like that; sā — that; syāt — might be; bhāsaḥ — effulgence; tasya — of Him; mahā-ātmanaḥ — the great Lord.
Translation: If hundreds of thousands of suns were to rise at once into the sky, their radiance might resemble the effulgence of the Supreme Person in that universal form.

Chapter 11 Verse 13
Sanskrit: tatraika-sthaṁ jagat kṛtsnaṁ pravibhaktam anekadhā apaśyad deva-devasya śarīre pāṇḍavas tadā
Transliteration: tatra — there; eka-stham — in one place; jagat — the universe; kṛtsnam — complete; pravibhaktam — divided; anekadhā — into many; apaśyat — could see; deva-devasya — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śarīre — in the universal form; pāṇḍavaḥ — Arjuna; tadā — at that time.
Translation: At that time Arjuna could see in the universal form of the Lord the unlimited expansions of the universe situated in one place although divided into many, many thousands.

Chapter 11 Verse 14
Sanskrit: tataḥ sa vismayāviṣṭo hṛṣṭa-romā dhanañ-jayaḥ praṇamya śirasā devaṁ kṛtāñjalir abhāṣata
Transliteration: tataḥ — thereafter; saḥ — he; vismaya-āviṣṭaḥ — being overwhelmed with wonder; hṛṣṭa-romā — with his bodily hairs standing on end due to his great ecstasy; dhanam-jayaḥ — Arjuna; praṇamya — offering obeisances; śirasā — with the head; devam — to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kṛta-añjaliḥ — with folded hands; abhāṣata — began to speak.
Translation: Then, bewildered and astonished, his hair standing on end, Arjuna bowed his head to offer obeisances and with folded hands began to pray to the Supreme Lord.

Chapter 11 Verse 15
Sanskrit: arjuna uvāca paśyāmi devāṁs tava deva dehe sarvāṁs tathā bhūta-viśeṣa-saṅghān brahmāṇam īśaṁ kamalāsana-stham ṛṣīṁś ca sarvān uragāṁś ca divyān
Transliteration: arjunaḥ uvāca — Arjuna said; paśyāmi — I see; devān — all the demigods; tava — Your; deva — O Lord; dehe — in the body; sarvān — all; tathā — also; bhūta — living entities; viśeṣa-saṅghān — specifically assembled; brahmāṇam — Lord Brahmā; īśam — Lord Śiva; kamala-āsana-stham — sitting on the lotus flower; ṛṣīn — great sages; ca — also; sarvān — all; uragān — serpents; ca — also; divyān — divine.
Translation: Arjuna said: My dear Lord Kṛṣṇa, I see assembled in Your body all the demigods and various other living entities. I see Brahmā sitting on the lotus flower, as well as Lord Śiva and all the sages and divine serpents.

Chapter 11 Verse 16
Sanskrit: aneka-bāhūdara-vaktra-netraṁ paśyāmi tvāṁ sarvato ’nanta-rūpam nāntaṁ na madhyaṁ na punas tavādiṁ paśyāmi viśveśvara viśva-rūpa
Transliteration: aneka — many; bāhu — arms; udara — bellies; vaktra — mouths; netram — eyes; paśyāmi — I see; tvām — You; sarvataḥ — on all sides; ananta-rūpam — unlimited form; na antam — no end; na madhyam — no middle; na punaḥ — nor again; tava — Your; ādim — beginning; paśyāmi — I see; viśva-īśvara — O Lord of the universe; viśva-rūpa — in the form of the universe.
Translation: O Lord of the universe, O universal form, I see in Your body many, many arms, bellies, mouths and eyes, expanded everywhere, without limit. I see in You no end, no middle and no beginning.

Chapter 11 Verse 17
Sanskrit: kirīṭinaṁ gadinaṁ cakriṇaṁ ca tejo-rāśiṁ sarvato dīptimantam paśyāmi tvāṁ durnirīkṣyaṁ samantād dīptānalārka-dyutim aprameyam
Transliteration: kirīṭinam — with helmets; gadinam — with maces; cakriṇam — with discs; ca — and; tejaḥ-rāśim — effulgence; sarvataḥ — on all sides; dīpti-mantam — glowing; paśyāmi — I see; tvām — You; durnirīkṣyam — difficult to see; samantāt — everywhere; dīpta-anala — blazing fire; arka — of the sun; dyutim — the sunshine; aprameyam — immeasurable.
Translation: Your form is difficult to see because of its glaring effulgence, spreading on all sides, like blazing fire or the immeasurable radiance of the sun. Yet I see this glowing form everywhere, adorned with various crowns, clubs and discs.

Chapter 11 Verse 18
Sanskrit: tvam akṣaraṁ paramaṁ veditavyaṁ tvam asya viśvasya paraṁ nidhānam tvam avyayaḥ śāśvata-dharma-goptā sanātanas tvaṁ puruṣo mato me
Transliteration: tvam — You; akṣaram — the infallible; paramam — supreme; veditavyam — to be understood; tvam — You; asya — of this; viśvasya — universe; param — supreme; nidhānam — basis; tvam — You; avyayaḥ — inexhaustible; śāśvata-dharma-goptā — maintainer of the eternal religion; sanātanaḥ — eternal; tvam — You; puruṣaḥ — the Supreme Personality; mataḥ me — this is my opinion.
Translation: You are the supreme primal objective. You are the ultimate resting place of all this universe. You are inexhaustible, and You are the oldest. You are the maintainer of the eternal religion, the Personality of Godhead. This is my opinion.

Chapter 11 Verse 19
Sanskrit: anādi-madhyāntam ananta-vīryam ananta-bāhuṁ śaśi-sūrya-netram paśyāmi tvāṁ dīpta-hutāśa-vaktraṁ sva-tejasā viśvam idaṁ tapantam
Transliteration: anādi — without beginning; madhya — middle; antam — or end; ananta — unlimited; vīryam — glories; ananta — unlimited; bāhum — arms; śaśi — the moon; sūrya — and sun; netram — eyes; paśyāmi — I see; tvām — You; dīpta — blazing; hutāśa-vaktram — fire coming out of Your mouth; sva-tejasā — by Your radiance; viśvam — universe; idam — this; tapantam — heating.
Translation: You are without origin, middle or end. Your glory is unlimited. You have numberless arms, and the sun and moon are Your eyes. I see You with blazing fire coming forth from Your mouth, burning this entire universe by Your own radiance.

Chapter 11 Verse 20
Sanskrit: dyāv ā-pṛthivyor idam antaraṁ hi vyāptaṁ tvayaikena diśaś ca sarvāḥ dṛṣṭvādbhutaṁ rūpam ugraṁ tavedaṁ loka-trayaṁ pravyathitaṁ mahātman
Transliteration: dyau — from outer space; ā-pṛthivyoḥ — to the earth; idam — this; antaram — between; hi — certainly; vyāptam — pervaded; tvayā — by You; ekena — alone; diśaḥ — directions; ca — and; sarvāḥ — all; dṛṣṭvā — by seeing; adbhutam — wonderful; rūpam — form; ugram — terrible; tava — Your; idam — this; loka — the planetary systems; trayam — three; pravyathitam — perturbed; mahā-ātman — O great one.
Translation: Although You are one, You spread throughout the sky and the planets and all space between. O great one, seeing this wondrous and terrible form, all the planetary systems are perturbed.

Chapter 11 Verse 21
Sanskrit: amī hi tvāṁ sura-saṅghā viśanti kecid bhītāḥ prāñjalayo gṛṇanti svastīty uktvā maharṣi-siddha-saṅghāḥ stuvanti tvāṁ stutibhiḥ puṣkalābhiḥ
Transliteration: amī — all those; hi — certainly; tvām — You; sura-saṅghāḥ — groups of demigods; viśanti — are entering; kecit — some of them; bhītāḥ — out of fear; prāñjalayaḥ — with folded hands; gṛṇanti — are offering prayers; svasti — all peace; iti — thus; uktvā — speaking; mahā-ṛṣi — great sages; siddha-saṅghāḥ — perfect beings; stuvanti — are singing hymns; tvām — unto You; stutibhiḥ — with prayers; puṣkalābhiḥ — Vedic hymns.
Translation: All the hosts of demigods are surrendering before You and entering into You. Some of them, very much afraid, are offering prayers with folded hands. Hosts of great sages and perfected beings, crying “All peace!” are praying to You by singing the Vedic hymns.

Chapter 11 Verse 22
Sanskrit: rudrādityā vasavo ye ca sādhyā viśve ’śvinau marutaś coṣmapāś ca gandharva-yakṣāsura-siddha-saṅghā vīkṣante tvāṁ vismitāś caiva sarve
Transliteration: rudra — manifestations of Lord Śiva; ādityāḥ — the Ādityas; vasavaḥ — the Vasus; ye — all those; ca — and; sādhyāḥ — the Sādhyas; viśve — the Viśvedevas; aśvinau — the Aśvinī-kumāras; marutaḥ — the Maruts; ca — and; uṣma-pāḥ — the forefathers; ca — and; gandharva — of the Gandharvas; yakṣa — the Yakṣas; asura — the demons; siddha — and the perfected demigods; saṅghāḥ — the assemblies; vīkṣante — are beholding; tvām — You; vismitāḥ — in wonder; ca — also; eva — certainly; sarve — all.
Translation: All the various manifestations of Lord Śiva, the Ādityas, the Vasus, the Sādhyas, the Viśvedevas, the two Aśvīs, the Maruts, the forefathers, the Gandharvas, the Yakṣas, the Asuras and the perfected demigods are beholding You in wonder.

Chapter 11 Verse 23
Sanskrit: rūpaṁ mahat te bahu-vaktra-netraṁ mahā-bāho bahu-bāhūru-pādam bahūdaraṁ bahu-daṁṣṭrā-karālaṁ dṛṣṭvā lokāḥ pravyathitās tathāham
Transliteration: rūpam — the form; mahat — very great; te — of You; bahu — many; vaktra — faces; netram — and eyes; mahā-bāho — O mighty-armed one; bahu — many; bāhu — arms; ūru — thighs; pādam — and legs; bahu-udaram — many bellies; bahu-daṁṣṭrā — many teeth; karālam — horrible; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; lokāḥ — all the planets; pravyathitāḥ — perturbed; tathā — similarly; aham — I.
Translation: O mighty-armed one, all the planets with their demigods are disturbed at seeing Your great form, with its many faces, eyes, arms, thighs, legs and bellies and Your many terrible teeth; and as they are disturbed, so am I.

Chapter 11 Verse 24
Sanskrit: nabhaḥ-spṛśaṁ dīptam aneka-varṇaṁ vyāttānanaṁ dīpta-viśāla-netram dṛṣṭvā hi tvāṁ pravyathitāntar-ātmā dhṛtiṁ na vindāmi śamaṁ ca viṣṇo
Transliteration: nabhaḥ-spṛśam — touching the sky; dīptam — glowing; aneka — many; varṇam — colors; vyātta — open; ānanam — mouths; dīpta — glowing; viśāla — very great; netram — eyes; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; hi — certainly; tvām — You; pravyathita — perturbed; antaḥ — within; ātmā — soul; dhṛtim — steadiness; na — not; vindāmi — I have; śamam — mental tranquillity; ca — also; viṣṇo — O Lord Viṣṇu.
Translation: O all-pervading Viṣṇu, seeing You with Your many radiant colors touching the sky, Your gaping mouths, and Your great glowing eyes, my mind is perturbed by fear. I can no longer maintain my steadiness or equilibrium of mind.

Chapter 11 Verse 25
Sanskrit: daṁṣṭrā-karālāni ca te mukhāni dṛṣṭvaiva kālānala-sannibhāni diśo na jāne na labhe ca śarma prasīda deveśa jagan-nivāsa
Transliteration: daṁṣṭrā — teeth; karālāni — terrible; ca — also; te — Your; mukhāni — faces; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; eva — thus; kāla-anala — the fire of death; sannibhāni — as if; diśaḥ — the directions; na — not; jāne — I know; na — not; labhe — I obtain; ca — and; śarma — grace; prasīda — be pleased; deva-īśa — O Lord of all lords; jagat-nivāsa — O refuge of the worlds.
Translation: O Lord of lords, O refuge of the worlds, please be gracious to me. I cannot keep my balance seeing thus Your blazing deathlike faces and awful teeth. In all directions I am bewildered. TEXTS 26-27 amī ca tvāṁ dhṛtarāṣṭrasya putrāḥ sarve sahaivāvani-pāla-saṅghaiḥ bhīṣmo droṇaḥ sūta-putras tathāsau sahāsmadīyair api yodha-mukhyaiḥ vaktrāṇi te tvaramāṇā viśanti daṁṣṭrā-karālāni bhayānakāni kecid vilagnā daśanāntareṣu sandṛśyante cūrṇitair uttamāṅgaiḥ Synonyms amī — these; ca — also; tvām — You; dhṛtarāṣṭrasya — of Dhṛtarāṣṭra; putrāḥ — the sons; sarve — all; saha — with; eva — indeed; avani-pāla — of warrior kings; saṅghaiḥ — the groups; bhīṣmaḥ — Bhīṣmadeva; droṇaḥ — Droṇācārya; sūta-putraḥ — Karṇa; tathā — also; asau — that; saha — with; asmadīyaiḥ — our; api — also; yodha-mukhyaiḥ — chiefs among the warriors; vaktrāṇi — mouths; te — Your; tvaramāṇāḥ — rushing; viśanti — are entering; daṁṣṭrā — teeth; karālāni — terrible; bhayānakāni — very fearful; kecit — some of them; vilagnāḥ — becoming attached; daśana-antareṣu — between the teeth; sandṛśyante — are seen; cūrṇitaiḥ — with smashed; uttama-aṅgaiḥ — heads. Translation All the sons of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, along with their allied kings, and Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Karṇa – and our chief soldiers also – are rushing into Your fearful mouths. And some I see trapped with heads smashed between Your teeth.

Chapter 11 Verse 28
Sanskrit: yathā nadīnāṁ bahavo ’mbu-vegāḥ samudram evābhimukhā dravanti tathā tavāmī nara-loka-vīrā viśanti vaktrāṇy abhivijvalanti
Transliteration: yathā — as; nadīnām — of the rivers; bahavaḥ — the many; ambu-vegāḥ — waves of the waters; samudram — the ocean; eva — certainly; abhimukhāḥ — towards; dravanti — glide; tathā — similarly; tava — Your; amī — all these; nara-loka-vīrāḥ — kings of human society; viśanti — are entering; vaktrāṇi — the mouths; abhivijvalanti — and are blazing.
Translation: As the many waves of the rivers flow into the ocean, so do all these great warriors enter blazing into Your mouths.

Chapter 11 Verse 29
Sanskrit: yathā pradīptaṁ jvalanaṁ pataṅgā viśanti nāśāya samṛddha-vegāḥ tathaiva nāśāya viśanti lokās tavāpi vaktrāṇi samṛddha-vegāḥ
Transliteration: yathā — as; pradīptam — blazing; jvalanam — a fire; pataṅgāḥ — moths; viśanti — enter; nāśāya — for destruction; samṛddha — with full; vegāḥ — speed; tathā eva — similarly; nāśāya — for destruction; viśanti — are entering; lokāḥ — all people; tava — Your; api — also; vaktrāṇi — mouths; samṛddha-vegāḥ — with full speed.
Translation: I see all people rushing full speed into Your mouths, as moths dash to destruction in a blazing fire.

Chapter 11 Verse 30
Sanskrit: lelihyase grasamānaḥ samantāl lokān samagrān vadanair jvaladbhiḥ tejobhir āpūrya jagat samagraṁ bhāsas tavogrāḥ pratapanti viṣṇo
Transliteration: lelihyase — You are licking; grasamānaḥ — devouring; samantāt — from all directions; lokān — people; samagrān — all; vadanaiḥ — by the mouths; jvaladbhiḥ — blazing; tejobhiḥ — by effulgence; āpūrya — covering; jagat — the universe; samagram — all; bhāsaḥ — rays; tava — Your; ugrāḥ — terrible; pratapanti — are scorching; viṣṇo — O all-pervading Lord.
Translation: O Viṣṇu, I see You devouring all people from all sides with Your flaming mouths. Covering all the universe with Your effulgence, You are manifest with terrible, scorching rays.

Chapter 11 Verse 31
Sanskrit: ākhyāhi me ko bhavān ugra-rūpo namo ’stu te deva-vara prasīda vijñātum icchāmi bhavantam ādyaṁ na hi prajānāmi tava pravṛttim
Transliteration: ākhyāhi — please explain; me — unto me; kaḥ — who; bhavān — You; ugra-rūpaḥ — fierce form; namaḥ astu — obeisances; te — unto You; deva-vara — O great one amongst the demigods; prasīda — be gracious; vijñātum — to know; icchāmi — I wish; bhavantam — You; ādyam — the original; na — not; hi — certainly; prajānāmi — do I know; tava — Your; pravṛttim — mission.
Translation: O Lord of lords, so fierce of form, please tell me who You are. I offer my obeisances unto You; please be gracious to me. You are the primal Lord. I want to know about You, for I do not know what Your mission is.

Chapter 11 Verse 32
Sanskrit: śrī-bhagavān uvāca kālo ’smi loka-kṣaya-kṛt pravṛddho lokān samāhartum iha pravṛttaḥ ṛte ’pi tvāṁ na bhaviṣyanti sarve ye ’vasthitāḥ praty-anīkeṣu yodhāḥ
Transliteration: śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Personality of Godhead said; kālaḥ — time; asmi — I am; loka — of the worlds; kṣaya-kṛt — the destroyer; pravṛddhaḥ — great; lokān — all people; samāhartum — in destroying; iha — in this world; pravṛttaḥ — engaged; ṛte — without, except for; api — even; tvām — you; na — never; bhaviṣyanti — will be; sarve — all; ye — who; avasthitāḥ — situated; prati-anīkeṣu — on the opposite sides; yodhāḥ — the soldiers.
Translation: The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Time I am, the great destroyer of the worlds, and I have come here to destroy all people. With the exception of you [the Pāṇḍavas], all the soldiers here on both sides will be slain.

Chapter 11 Verse 33
Sanskrit: tasmāt tvam uttiṣṭha yaśo labhasva jitvā śatrūn bhuṅkṣva rājyaṁ samṛddham mayaivaite nihatāḥ pūrvam eva nimitta-mātraṁ bhava savya-sācin
Transliteration: tasmāt — therefore; tvam — you; uttiṣṭha — get up; yaśaḥ — fame; labhasva — gain; jitvā — conquering; śatrūn — enemies; bhuṅkṣva — enjoy; rājyam — kingdom; samṛddham — flourishing; mayā — by Me; eva — certainly; ete — all these; nihatāḥ — killed; pūrvam eva — by previous arrangement; nimitta-mātram — just the cause; bhava — become; savya-sācin — O Savyasācī.
Translation: Therefore get up. Prepare to fight and win glory. Conquer your enemies and enjoy a flourishing kingdom. They are already put to death by My arrangement, and you, O Savyasācī, can be but an instrument in the fight.

Chapter 11 Verse 34
Sanskrit: droṇaṁ ca bhīṣmaṁ ca jayadrathaṁ ca karṇaṁ tathānyān api yodha-vīrān mayā hatāṁs tvaṁ jahi mā vyathiṣṭhā yudhyasva jetāsi raṇe sapatnān
Transliteration: droṇam ca — also Droṇa; bhīṣmam ca — also Bhīṣma; jayadratham ca — also Jayadratha; karṇam — Karṇa; tathā — also; anyān — others; api — certainly; yodha-vīrān — great warriors; mayā — by Me; hatān — already killed; tvam — you; jahi — destroy; mā — do not; vyathiṣṭhāḥ — be disturbed; yudhyasva — just fight; jetā asi — you will conquer; raṇe — in the fight; sapatnān — enemies.
Translation: Droṇa, Bhīṣma, Jayadratha, Karṇa and the other great warriors have already been destroyed by Me. Therefore, kill them and do not be disturbed. Simply fight, and you will vanquish your enemies in battle.

Chapter 11 Verse 35
Sanskrit: sañjaya uvāca etac chrutvā vacanaṁ keśavasya kṛtāñjalir vepamānaḥ kirīṭī namaskṛtvā bhūya evāha kṛṣṇaṁ sa-gadgadaṁ bhīta-bhītaḥ praṇamya
Transliteration: sañjayaḥ uvāca — Sañjaya said; etat — thus; śrutvā — hearing; vacanam — the speech; keśavasya — of Kṛṣṇa; kṛta-añjaliḥ — with folded hands; vepamānaḥ — trembling; kirīṭī — Arjuna; namaskṛtvā — offering obeisances; bhūyaḥ — again; eva — also; āha — said; kṛṣṇam — unto Kṛṣṇa; sa-gadgadam — with a faltering voice; bhīta-bhītaḥ — fearful; praṇamya — offering obeisances.
Translation: Sañjaya said to Dhṛtarāṣṭra: O King, after hearing these words from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the trembling Arjuna offered obeisances with folded hands again and again. He fearfully spoke to Lord Kṛṣṇa in a faltering voice, as follows.

Chapter 11 Verse 36
Sanskrit: arjuna uvāca sthāne hṛṣīkeśa tava prakīrtyā jagat prahṛṣyaty anurajyate ca rakṣāṁsi bhītāni diśo dravanti sarve namasyanti ca siddha-saṅghāḥ
Transliteration: arjunaḥ uvāca — Arjuna said; sthāne — rightly; hṛṣīka-īśa — O master of all senses; tava — Your; prakīrtyā — by the glories; jagat — the entire world; prahṛṣyati — is rejoicing; anurajyate — is becoming attached; ca — and; rakṣāṁsi — the demons; bhītāni — out of fear; diśaḥ — in all directions; dravanti — are fleeing; sarve — all; namasyanti — are offering respects; ca — also; siddha-saṅghāḥ — the perfect human beings.
Translation: Arjuna said: O master of the senses, the world becomes joyful upon hearing Your name, and thus everyone becomes attached to You. Although the perfected beings offer You their respectful homage, the demons are afraid, and they flee here and there. All this is rightly done.

Chapter 11 Verse 37
Sanskrit: kasmāc ca te na nameran mahātman garīyase brahmaṇo ’py ādi-kartre ananta deveśa jagan-nivāsa tvam akṣaraṁ sad-asat tat paraṁ yat
Transliteration: kasmāt — why; ca — also; te — unto You; na — not; nameran — they should offer proper obeisances; mahā-ātman — O great one; garīyase — who are better; brahmaṇaḥ — than Brahmā; api — although; ādi-kartre — to the supreme creator; ananta — O unlimited; deva-īśa — O God of the gods; jagat-nivāsa — O refuge of the universe; tvam — You are; akṣaram — imperishable; sat-asat — to cause and effect; tat param — transcendental; yat — because.
Translation: O great one, greater even than Brahmā, You are the original creator. Why then should they not offer their respectful obeisances unto You? O limitless one, God of gods, refuge of the universe! You are the invincible source, the cause of all causes, transcendental to this material manifestation.

Chapter 11 Verse 38
Sanskrit: tvam ādi-devaḥ puruṣaḥ purāṇas tvam asya viśvasya paraṁ nidhānam vettāsi vedyaṁ ca paraṁ ca dhāma tvayā tataṁ viśvam ananta-rūpa
Transliteration: tvam — You; ādi-devaḥ — the original Supreme God; puruṣaḥ — personality; purāṇaḥ — old; tvam — You; asya — of this; viśvasya — universe; param — transcendental; nidhānam — refuge; vettā — the knower; asi — You are; vedyam — the knowable; ca — and; param — transcendental; ca — and; dhāma — refuge; tvayā — by You; tatam — pervaded; viśvam — the universe; ananta-rūpa — O unlimited form.
Translation: You are the original Personality of Godhead, the oldest, the ultimate sanctuary of this manifested cosmic world. You are the knower of everything, and You are all that is knowable. You are the supreme refuge, above the material modes. O limitless form! This whole cosmic manifestation is pervaded by You!

Chapter 11 Verse 39
Sanskrit: vāyur yamo ’gnir varuṇaḥ śaśāṅkaḥ prajāpatis tvaṁ prapitāmahaś ca namo namas te ’stu sahasra-kṛtvaḥ punaś ca bhūyo ’pi namo namas te
Transliteration: vāyuḥ — air; yamaḥ — the controller; agniḥ — fire; varuṇaḥ — water; śaśa-aṅkaḥ — the moon; prajāpatiḥ — Brahmā; tvam — You; prapitāmahaḥ — the great-grandfather; ca — also; namaḥ — my respects; namaḥ — again my respects; te — unto You; astu — let there be; sahasra-kṛtvaḥ — a thousand times; punaḥ ca — and again; bhūyaḥ — again; api — also; namaḥ — offering my respects; namaḥ te — offering my respects unto You.
Translation: You are air, and You are the supreme controller! You are fire, You are water, and You are the moon! You are Brahmā, the first living creature, and You are the great-grandfather. I therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto You a thousand times, and again and yet again!

Chapter 11 Verse 40
Sanskrit: namaḥ purastād atha pṛṣṭhatas te namo ’stu te sarvata eva sarva ananta-vīryāmita-vikramas tvaṁ sarvaṁ samāpnoṣi tato ’si sarvaḥ
Transliteration: namaḥ — offering obeisances; purastāt — from the front; atha — also; pṛṣṭhataḥ — from behind; te — unto You; namaḥ astu — I offer my respects; te — unto You; sarvataḥ — from all sides; eva — indeed; sarva — because You are everything; ananta-vīrya — unlimited potency; amita-vikramaḥ — and unlimited force; tvam — You; sarvam — everything; samāpnoṣi — You cover; tataḥ — therefore; asi — You are; sarvaḥ — everything.
Translation: Obeisances to You from the front, from behind and from all sides! O unbounded power, You are the master of limitless might! You are all-pervading, and thus You are everything!

Chapter 11 Verse 43
Sanskrit: pitāsi lokasya carācarasya tvam asya pūjyaś ca gurur garīyān na tvat-samo ’sty abhyadhikaḥ kuto ’nyo loka-traye ’py apratima-prabhāva
Transliteration: pitā — the father; asi — You are; lokasya — of all the world; cara — moving; acarasya — and nonmoving; tvam — You are; asya — of this; pūjyaḥ — worshipable; ca — also; guruḥ — master; garīyān — glorious; na — never; tvat-samaḥ — equal to You; asti — there is; abhyadhikaḥ — greater; kutaḥ — how is it possible; anyaḥ — other; loka-traye — in the three planetary systems; api — also; apratima-prabhāva — O immeasurable power.
Translation: You are the father of this complete cosmic manifestation, of the moving and the nonmoving. You are its worshipable chief, the supreme spiritual master. No one is greater than You, nor can anyone be one with You. How then could there be anyone greater than You within the three worlds, O Lord of immeasurable power?

Chapter 11 Verse 44
Sanskrit: tasmāt praṇamya praṇidhāya kāyaṁ prasādaye tvām aham īśam īḍyam piteva putrasya sakheva sakhyuḥ priyaḥ priyāyārhasi deva soḍhum
Transliteration: tasmāt — therefore; praṇamya — offering obeisances; praṇidhāya — laying down; kāyam — the body; prasādaye — to beg mercy; tvām — unto You; aham — I; īśam — unto the Supreme Lord; īḍyam — worshipable; pitā iva — like a father; putrasya — with a son; sakhā iva — like a friend; sakhyuḥ — with a friend; priyaḥ — a lover; priyāyāḥ — with the dearmost; arhasi — You should; deva — my Lord; soḍhum — tolerate.
Translation: You are the Supreme Lord, to be worshiped by every living being. Thus I fall down to offer You my respectful obeisances and ask Your mercy. As a father tolerates the impudence of his son, a friend the impertinence of a friend, or a husband the familiarity of his wife, please tolerate the wrongs I may have done You.

Chapter 11 Verse 45
Sanskrit: adṛṣṭa-pūrvaṁ hṛṣito ’smi dṛṣṭvā bhayena ca pravyathitaṁ mano me tad eva me darśaya deva rūpaṁ prasīda deveśa jagan-nivāsa
Transliteration: adṛṣṭa-pūrvam — never seen before; hṛṣitaḥ — gladdened; asmi — I am; dṛṣṭvā — by seeing; bhayena — out of fear; ca — also; pravyathitam — perturbed; manaḥ — mind; me — my; tat — that; eva — certainly; me — unto me; darśaya — show; deva — O Lord; rūpam — the form; prasīda — just be gracious; deva-īśa — O Lord of lords; jagat-nivāsa — O refuge of the universe.
Translation: After seeing this universal form, which I have never seen before, I am gladdened, but at the same time my mind is disturbed with fear. Therefore please bestow Your grace upon me and reveal again Your form as the Personality of Godhead, O Lord of lords, O abode of the universe.

Chapter 11 Verse 46
Sanskrit: kirīṭinaṁ gadinaṁ cakra-hastam icchāmi tvāṁ draṣṭum ahaṁ tathaiva tenaiva rūpeṇa catur-bhujena sahasra-bāho bhava viśva-mūrte
Transliteration: kirīṭinam — with helmet; gadinam — with club; cakra-hastam — disc in hand; icchāmi — I wish; tvām — You; draṣṭum — to see; aham — I; tathā eva — in that position; tena eva — in that; rūpeṇa — form; catuḥ-bhujena — four-handed; sahasra-bāho — O thousand-handed one; bhava — just become; viśva-mūrte — O universal form.
Translation: O universal form, O thousand-armed Lord, I wish to see You in Your four-armed form, with helmeted head and with club, wheel, conch and lotus flower in Your hands. I long to see You in that form.

Chapter 11 Verse 47
Sanskrit: śrī-bhagavān uvāca mayā prasannena tavārjunedaṁ rūpaṁ paraṁ darśitam ātma-yogāt tejo-mayaṁ viśvam anantam ādyaṁ yan me tvad anyena na dṛṣṭa-pūrvam
Transliteration: śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; mayā — by Me; prasannena — happily; tava — unto you; arjuna — O Arjuna; idam — this; rūpam — form; param — transcendental; darśitam — shown; ātma-yogāt — by My internal potency; tejaḥ-mayam — full of effulgence; viśvam — the entire universe; anantam — unlimited; ādyam — original; yat — that which; me — My; tvat anyena — besides you; na dṛṣṭa-pūrvam — no one has previously seen.
Translation: The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, happily have I shown you, by My internal potency, this supreme universal form within the material world. No one before you has ever seen this primal form, unlimited and full of glaring effulgence.

Chapter 11 Verse 48
Sanskrit: na veda-yajñādhyayanair na dānair na ca kriyābhir na tapobhir ugraiḥ evaṁ-rūpaḥ śakya ahaṁ nṛ-loke draṣṭuṁ tvad anyena kuru-pravīra
Transliteration: na — never; veda-yajña — by sacrifice; adhyayanaiḥ — or Vedic study; na — never; dānaiḥ — by charity; na — never; ca — also; kriyābhiḥ — by pious activities; na — never; tapobhiḥ — by serious penances; ugraiḥ — severe; evam-rūpaḥ — in this form; śakyaḥ — can; aham — I; nṛ-loke — in this material world; draṣṭum — be seen; tvat — than you; anyena — by another; kuru-pravīra — O best among the Kuru warriors.
Translation: O best of the Kuru warriors, no one before you has ever seen this universal form of Mine, for neither by studying the Vedas, nor by performing sacrifices, nor by charity, nor by pious activities, nor by severe penances can I be seen in this form in the material world.

Chapter 11 Verse 49
Sanskrit: mā te vyathā mā ca vimūḍha-bhāvo dṛṣṭvā rūpaṁ ghoram īdṛṅ mamedam vyapeta-bhīḥ prīta-manāḥ punas tvaṁ tad eva me rūpam idaṁ prapaśya
Transliteration: mā — let it not be; te — unto you; vyathā — trouble; mā — let it not be; ca — also; vimūḍha-bhāvaḥ — bewilderment; dṛṣṭvā — by seeing; rūpam — form; ghoram — horrible; īdṛk — as it is; mama — My; idam — this; vyapeta-bhīḥ — free from all fear; prīta-manāḥ — pleased in mind; punaḥ — again; tvam — you; tat — that; eva — thus; me — My; rūpam — form; idam — this; prapaśya — just see.
Translation: You have been perturbed and bewildered by seeing this horrible feature of Mine. Now let it be finished. My devotee, be free again from all disturbances. With a peaceful mind you can now see the form you desire.

Chapter 11 Verse 50
Sanskrit: sañjaya uvāca ity arjunaṁ vāsudevas tathoktvā svakaṁ rūpaṁ darśayām āsa bhūyaḥ āśvāsayām āsa ca bhītam enaṁ bhūtvā punaḥ saumya-vapur mahātmā
Transliteration: sañjayaḥ uvāca — Sañjaya said; iti — thus; arjunam — unto Arjuna; vāsudevaḥ — Kṛṣṇa; tathā — in that way; uktvā — speaking; svakam — His own; rūpam — form; darśayām āsa — showed; bhūyaḥ — again; āśvāsayām āsa — encouraged; ca — also; bhītam — fearful; enam — him; bhūtvā — becoming; punaḥ — again; saumya-vapuḥ — the beautiful form; mahā-ātmā — the great one.
Translation: Sañjaya said to Dhṛtarāṣṭra: The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, having spoken thus to Arjuna, displayed His real four-armed form and at last showed His two-armed form, thus encouraging the fearful Arjuna.

Chapter 11 Verse 51
Sanskrit: arjuna uvāca dṛṣṭvedaṁ mānuṣaṁ rūpaṁ tava saumyaṁ janārdana idānīm asmi saṁvṛttaḥ sa-cetāḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ
Transliteration: arjunaḥ uvāca — Arjuna said; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; idam — this; mānuṣam — human; rūpam — form; tava — Your; saumyam — very beautiful; janārdana — O chastiser of the enemies; idānīm — now; asmi — I am; saṁvṛttaḥ — settled; sa-cetāḥ — in my consciousness; prakṛtim — to my own nature; gataḥ — returned.
Translation: When Arjuna thus saw Kṛṣṇa in His original form, he said: O Janārdana, seeing this humanlike form, so very beautiful, I am now composed in mind, and I am restored to my original nature.

Chapter 11 Verse 52
Sanskrit: śrī-bhagavān uvāca su-durdarśam idaṁ rūpaṁ dṛṣṭavān asi yan mama devā apy asya rūpasya nityaṁ darśana-kāṅkṣiṇaḥ
Transliteration: śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; su-durdarśam — very difficult to see; idam — this; rūpam — form; dṛṣṭavān asi — as you have seen; yat — which; mama — of Mine; devāḥ — the demigods; api — also; asya — this; rūpasya — form; nityam — eternally; darśana-kāṅkṣiṇaḥ — aspiring to see.
Translation: The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, this form of Mine you are now seeing is very difficult to behold. Even the demigods are ever seeking the opportunity to see this form, which is so dear.

Chapter 11 Verse 53
Sanskrit: nāhaṁ vedair na tapasā na dānena na cejyayā śakya evaṁ-vidho draṣṭuṁ dṛṣṭavān asi māṁ yathā
Transliteration: na — never; aham — I; vedaiḥ — by study of the Vedas; na — never; tapasā — by serious penances; na — never; dānena — by charity; na — never; ca — also; ijyayā — by worship; śakyaḥ — it is possible; evam-vidhaḥ — like this; draṣṭum — to see; dṛṣṭavān — seeing; asi — you are; mām — Me; yathā — as.
Translation: The form you are seeing with your transcendental eyes cannot be understood simply by studying the Vedas, nor by undergoing serious penances, nor by charity, nor by worship. It is not by these means that one can see Me as I am.

Chapter 11 Verse 54
Sanskrit: bhaktyā tv ananyayā śakya aham evaṁ-vidho ’rjuna jñātuṁ draṣṭuṁ ca tattvena praveṣṭuṁ ca paran-tapa
Transliteration: bhaktyā — by devotional service; tu — but; ananyayā — without being mixed with fruitive activities or speculative knowledge; śakyaḥ — possible; aham — I; evam-vidhaḥ — like this; arjuna — O Arjuna; jñātum — to know; draṣṭum — to see; ca — and; tattvena — in fact; praveṣṭum — to enter into; ca — also; param-tapa — O subduer of the enemy.
Translation: My dear Arjuna, only by undivided devotional service can I be understood as I am, standing before you, and can thus be seen directly. Only in this way can you enter into the mysteries of My understanding.

Chapter 11 Verse 55
Sanskrit: mat-karma-kṛn mat-paramo mad-bhaktaḥ saṅga-varjitaḥ nirvairaḥ sarva-bhūteṣu yaḥ sa mām eti pāṇḍava
Transliteration: mat-karma-kṛt — engaged in doing My work; mat-paramaḥ — considering Me the Supreme; mat-bhaktaḥ — engaged in My devotional service; saṅga-varjitaḥ — freed from the contamination of fruitive activities and mental speculation; nirvairaḥ — without an enemy; sarva-bhūteṣu — among all living entities; yaḥ — one who; saḥ — he; mām — unto Me; eti — comes; pāṇḍava — O son of Pāṇḍu.
Translation: My dear Arjuna, he who engages in My pure devotional service, free from the contaminations of fruitive activities and mental speculation, he who works for Me, who makes Me the supreme goal of his life, and who is friendly to every living being – he certainly comes to Me.
