Chapter 16 Verse 4
Sanskrit: dambho darpo ’bhimānaś ca krodhaḥ pāruṣyam eva ca ajñānaṁ cābhijātasya pārtha sampadam āsurīm
Transliteration: dambhaḥ — pride; darpaḥ — arrogance; abhimānaḥ — conceit; ca — and; krodhaḥ — anger; pāruṣyam — harshness; eva — certainly; ca — and; ajñānam — ignorance; ca — and; abhijātasya — of one who is born of; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; sampadam — the qualities; āsurīm — of the demoniac nature.
Translation: Pride, arrogance, conceit, anger, harshness and ignorance – these qualities belong to those of demoniac nature, O son of Pṛthā.

Chapter 16 Verse 5
Sanskrit: daivī sampad vimokṣāya nibandhāyāsurī matā mā śucaḥ sampadaṁ daivīm abhijāto ’si pāṇḍava
Transliteration: daivī — transcendental; sampat — assets; vimokṣāya — meant for liberation; nibandhāya — for bondage; āsurī — demoniac qualities; matā — are considered; mā — do not; śucaḥ — worry; sampadam — assets; daivīm — transcendental; abhijātaḥ — born of; asi — you are; pāṇḍava — O son of Pāṇḍu.
Translation: The transcendental qualities are conducive to liberation, whereas the demoniac qualities make for bondage. Do not worry, O son of Pāṇḍu, for you are born with the divine qualities.

Chapter 16 Verse 6
Sanskrit: dvau bhūta-sargau loke ’smin daiva āsura eva ca daivo vistaraśaḥ prokta āsuraṁ pārtha me śṛṇu
Transliteration: dvau — two; bhūta-sargau — created living beings; loke — in the world; asmin — this; daivaḥ — godly; āsuraḥ — demoniac; eva — certainly; ca — and; daivaḥ — the divine; vistaraśaḥ — at great length; proktaḥ — said; āsuram — the demoniac; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; me — from Me; śṛṇu — just hear.
Translation: O son of Pṛthā, in this world there are two kinds of created beings. One is called divine and the other demoniac. I have already explained to you at length the divine qualities. Now hear from Me of the demoniac.

Chapter 16 Verse 7
Sanskrit: pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca janā na vidur āsurāḥ na śaucaṁ nāpi cācāro na satyaṁ teṣu vidyate
Transliteration: pravṛttim — acting properly; ca — also; nivṛttim — not acting improperly; ca — and; janāḥ — persons; na — never; viduḥ — know; āsurāḥ — of demoniac quality; na — never; śaucam — cleanliness; na — nor; api — also; ca — and; ācāraḥ — behavior; na — never; satyam — truth; teṣu — in them; vidyate — there is.
Translation: Those who are demoniac do not know what is to be done and what is not to be done. Neither cleanliness nor proper behavior nor truth is found in them.

Chapter 16 Verse 8
Sanskrit: asatyam apratiṣṭhaṁ te jagad āhur anīśvaram aparaspara-sambhūtaṁ kim anyat kāma-haitukam
Transliteration: asatyam — unreal; apratiṣṭham — without foundation; te — they; jagat — the cosmic manifestation; āhuḥ — say; anīśvaram — with no controller; aparaspara — without cause; sambhūtam — arisen; kim anyat — there is no other cause; kāma-haitukam — it is due to lust only.
Translation: They say that this world is unreal, with no foundation, no God in control. They say it is produced of sex desire and has no cause other than lust.

Chapter 16 Verse 9
Sanskrit: etāṁ dṛṣṭim avaṣṭabhya naṣṭātmāno ’lpa-buddhayaḥ prabhavanty ugra-karmāṇaḥ kṣayāya jagato ’hitāḥ
Transliteration: etām — this; dṛṣṭim — vision; avaṣṭabhya — accepting; naṣṭa — having lost; ātmānaḥ — themselves; alpa-buddhayaḥ — the less intelligent; prabhavanti — flourish; ugra-karmāṇaḥ — engaged in painful activities; kṣayāya — for destruction; jagataḥ — of the world; ahitāḥ — unbeneficial.
Translation: Following such conclusions, the demoniac, who are lost to themselves and who have no intelligence, engage in unbeneficial, horrible works meant to destroy the world.

Chapter 16 Verse 10
Sanskrit: kāmam āśritya duṣpūraṁ dambha-māna-madānvitāḥ mohād gṛhītvāsad-grāhān pravartante ’śuci-vratāḥ
Transliteration: kāmam — lust; āśritya — taking shelter of; duṣpūram — insatiable; dambha — of pride; māna — and false prestige; mada-anvitāḥ — absorbed in the conceit; mohāt — by illusion; gṛhītvā — taking; asat — nonpermanent; grāhān — things; pravartante — they flourish; aśuci — to the unclean; vratāḥ — avowed.
Translation: Taking shelter of insatiable lust and absorbed in the conceit of pride and false prestige, the demoniac, thus illusioned, are always sworn to unclean work, attracted by the impermanent.

Chapter 16 Verse 16
Sanskrit: aneka-citta-vibhrāntā moha-jāla-samāvṛtāḥ prasaktāḥ kāma-bhogeṣu patanti narake ’śucau
Transliteration: aneka — numerous; citta — by anxieties; vibhrāntāḥ — perplexed; moha — of illusions; jāla — by a network; samāvṛtāḥ — surrounded; prasaktāḥ — attached; kāma-bhogeṣu — to sense gratification; patanti — they glide down; narake — into hell; aśucau — unclean.
Translation: Thus perplexed by various anxieties and bound by a network of illusions, they become too strongly attached to sense enjoyment and fall down into hell.

Chapter 16 Verse 17
Sanskrit: ātma-sambhāvitāḥ stabdhā dhana-māna-madānvitāḥ yajante nāma-yajñais te dambhenāvidhi-pūrvakam
Transliteration: ātma-sambhāvitāḥ — self-complacent; stabdhāḥ — impudent; dhana-māna — of wealth and false prestige; mada — in the delusion; anvitāḥ — absorbed; yajante — they perform sacrifice; nāma — in name only; yajñaiḥ — with sacrifices; te — they; dambhena — out of pride; avidhi-pūrvakam — without following any rules and regulations.
Translation: Self-complacent and always impudent, deluded by wealth and false prestige, they sometimes proudly perform sacrifices in name only, without following any rules or regulations.

Chapter 16 Verse 18
Sanskrit: ahaṅkāraṁ balaṁ darpaṁ kāmaṁ krodhaṁ ca saṁśritāḥ mām ātma-para-deheṣu pradviṣanto ’bhyasūyakāḥ
Transliteration: ahaṅkāram — false ego; balam — strength; darpam — pride; kāmam — lust; krodham — anger; ca — also; saṁśritāḥ — having taken shelter of; mām — Me; ātma — in their own; para — and in other; deheṣu — bodies; pradviṣantaḥ — blaspheming; abhyasūyakāḥ — envious.
Translation: Bewildered by false ego, strength, pride, lust and anger, the demons become envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated in their own bodies and in the bodies of others, and blaspheme against the real religion.

Chapter 16 Verse 19
Sanskrit: tān ahaṁ dviṣataḥ krūrān saṁsāreṣu narādhamān kṣipāmy ajasram aśubhān āsurīṣv eva yoniṣu
Transliteration: tān — those; aham — I; dviṣataḥ — envious; krūrān — mischievous; saṁsāreṣu — into the ocean of material existence; nara-adhamān — the lowest of mankind; kṣipāmi — I put; ajasram — forever; aśubhān — inauspicious; āsurīṣu — demoniac; eva — certainly; yoniṣu — into the wombs.
Translation: Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, I perpetually cast into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species of life.

Chapter 16 Verse 20
Sanskrit: āsurīṁ yonim āpannā mūḍhā janmani janmani mām aprāpyaiva kaunteya tato yānty adhamāṁ gatim
Transliteration: āsurīm — demoniac; yonim — species; āpannāḥ — gaining; mūḍhāḥ — the foolish; janmani janmani — in birth after birth; mām — Me; aprāpya — without achieving; eva — certainly; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; tataḥ — thereafter; yānti — go; adhamām — condemned; gatim — destination.
Translation: Attaining repeated birth amongst the species of demoniac life, O son of Kuntī, such persons can never approach Me. Gradually they sink down to the most abominable type of existence.

Chapter 16 Verse 21
Sanskrit: tri-vidhaṁ narakasyedaṁ dvāraṁ nāśanam ātmanaḥ kāmaḥ krodhas tathā lobhas tasmād etat trayaṁ tyajet
Transliteration: tri-vidham — of three kinds; narakasya — of hell; idam — this; dvāram — gate; nāśanam — destructive; ātmanaḥ — of the self; kāmaḥ — lust; krodhaḥ — anger; tathā — as well as; lobhaḥ — greed; tasmāt — therefore; etat — these; trayam — three; tyajet — one must give up.
Translation: There are three gates leading to this hell – lust, anger and greed. Every sane man should give these up, for they lead to the degradation of the soul.

Chapter 16 Verse 22
Sanskrit: etair vimuktaḥ kaunteya tamo-dvārais tribhir naraḥ ācaraty ātmanaḥ śreyas tato yāti parāṁ gatim
Transliteration: etaiḥ — from these; vimuktaḥ — being liberated; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; tamaḥ-dvāraiḥ — from the gates of ignorance; tribhiḥ — of three kinds; naraḥ — a person; ācarati — performs; ātmanaḥ — for the self; śreyaḥ — benediction; tataḥ — thereafter; yāti — he goes; parām — to the supreme; gatim — destination.
Translation: The man who has escaped these three gates of hell, O son of Kuntī, performs acts conducive to self-realization and thus gradually attains the supreme destination.

Chapter 16 Verse 23
Sanskrit: yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya vartate kāma-kārataḥ na sa siddhim avāpnoti na sukhaṁ na parāṁ gatim
Transliteration: yaḥ — anyone who; śāstra-vidhim — the regulations of the scriptures; utsṛjya — giving up; vartate — remains; kāma-kārataḥ — acting whimsically in lust; na — never; saḥ — he; siddhim — perfection; avāpnoti — achieves; na — never; sukham — happiness; na — never; parām — the supreme; gatim — perfectional stage.
Translation: He who discards scriptural injunctions and acts according to his own whims attains neither perfection, nor happiness, nor the supreme destination.

Chapter 16 Verse 24
Sanskrit: tasmāc chāstraṁ pramāṇaṁ te kāryākārya-vyavasthitau jñātvā śāstra-vidhānoktaṁ karma kartum ihārhasi
Transliteration: tasmāt — therefore; śāstram — the scriptures; pramāṇam — evidence; te — your; kārya — duty; akārya — and forbidden activities; vyavasthitau — in determining; jñātvā — knowing; śāstra — of scripture; vidhāna — the regulations; uktam — as declared; karma — work; kartum — do; iha — in this world; arhasi — you should.
Translation: One should therefore understand what is duty and what is not duty by the regulations of the scriptures. Knowing such rules and regulations, one should act so that he may gradually be elevated.
