Chapter 13 Verse 3
Sanskrit: kṣetra-jñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata kṣetra-kṣetrajñayor jñānaṁ yat taj jñānaṁ mataṁ mama
Transliteration: kṣetra-jñam — the knower of the field; ca — also; api — certainly; mām — Me; viddhi — know; sarva — all; kṣetreṣu — in bodily fields; bhārata — O son of Bharata; kṣetra — the field of activities (the body); kṣetra-jñayoḥ — and the knower of the field; jñānam — knowledge of; yat — that which; tat — that; jñānam — knowledge; matam — opinion; mama — My.
Translation: O scion of Bharata, you should understand that I am also the knower in all bodies, and to understand this body and its knower is called knowledge. That is My opinion.

Chapter 13 Verse 4
Sanskrit: tat kṣetraṁ yac ca yādṛk ca yad-vikāri yataś ca yat sa ca yo yat-prabhāvaś ca tat samāsena me śṛṇu
Transliteration: tat — that; kṣetram — field of activities; yat — what; ca — also; yādṛk — as it is; ca — also; yat — having what; vikāri — changes; yataḥ — from which; ca — also; yat — what; saḥ — he; ca — also; yaḥ — who; yat — having what; prabhāvaḥ — influence; ca — also; tat — that; samāsena — in summary; me — from Me; śṛṇu — understand.
Translation: Now please hear My brief description of this field of activity and how it is constituted, what its changes are, whence it is produced, who that knower of the field of activities is, and what his influences are.

Chapter 13 Verse 5
Sanskrit: ṛṣibhir bahudhā gītaṁ chandobhir vividhaiḥ pṛthak brahma-sūtra-padaiś caiva hetumadbhir viniścitaiḥ
Transliteration: ṛṣibhiḥ — by the wise sages; bahudhā — in many ways; gītam — described; chandobhiḥ — by Vedic hymns; vividhaiḥ — various; pṛthak — variously; brahma-sūtra — of the Vedānta; padaiḥ — by the aphorisms; ca — also; eva — certainly; hetu-madbhiḥ — with cause and effect; viniścitaiḥ — certain.
Translation: That knowledge of the field of activities and of the knower of activities is described by various sages in various Vedic writings. It is especially presented in Vedānta-sūtra with all reasoning as to cause and effect.

Chapter 13 Verse 13
Sanskrit: jñeyaṁ yat tat pravakṣyāmi yaj jñātvāmṛtam aśnute anādi mat-paraṁ brahma na sat tan nāsad ucyate
Transliteration: jñeyam — the knowable; yat — which; tat — that; pravakṣyāmi — I shall now explain; yat — which; jñātvā — knowing; amṛtam — nectar; aśnute — one tastes; anādi — beginningless; mat-param — subordinate to Me; brahma — spirit; na — neither; sat — cause; tat — that; na — nor; asat — effect; ucyate — is said to be.
Translation: I shall now explain the knowable, knowing which you will taste the eternal. Brahman, the spirit, beginningless and subordinate to Me, lies beyond the cause and effect of this material world.

Chapter 13 Verse 14
Sanskrit: sarvataḥ pāṇi-pādaṁ tat sarvato ’kṣi-śiro-mukham sarvataḥ śrutimal loke sarvam āvṛtya tiṣṭhati
Transliteration: sarvataḥ — everywhere; pāṇi — hands; pādam — legs; tat — that; sarvataḥ — everywhere; akṣi — eyes; śiraḥ — heads; mukham — faces; sarvataḥ — everywhere; śruti-mat — having ears; loke — in the world; sarvam — everything; āvṛtya — covering; tiṣṭhati — exists.
Translation: Everywhere are His hands and legs, His eyes, heads and faces, and He has ears everywhere. In this way the Supersoul exists, pervading everything.

Chapter 13 Verse 15
Sanskrit: sarvendriya-guṇābhāsaṁ sarvendriya-vivarjitam asaktaṁ sarva-bhṛc caiva nirguṇaṁ guṇa-bhoktṛ ca
Transliteration: sarva — of all; indriya — senses; guṇa — of the qualities; ābhāsam — the original source; sarva — all; indriya — senses; vivarjitam — being without; asaktam — without attachment; sarva-bhṛt — the maintainer of everyone; ca — also; eva — certainly; nirguṇam — without material qualities; guṇa-bhoktṛ — master of the guṇas; ca — also.
Translation: The Supersoul is the original source of all senses, yet He is without senses. He is unattached, although He is the maintainer of all living beings. He transcends the modes of nature, and at the same time He is the master of all the modes of material nature.

Chapter 13 Verse 16
Sanskrit: bahir antaś ca bhūtānām acaraṁ caram eva ca sūkṣmatvāt tad avijñeyaṁ dūra-sthaṁ cāntike ca tat
Transliteration: bahiḥ — outside; antaḥ — inside; ca — also; bhūtānām — of all living entities; acaram — not moving; caram — moving; eva — also; ca — and; sūkṣmatvāt — on account of being subtle; tat — that; avijñeyam — unknowable; dūra-stham — far away; ca — also; antike — near; ca — and; tat — that.
Translation: The Supreme Truth exists outside and inside of all living beings, the moving and the nonmoving. Because He is subtle, He is beyond the power of the material senses to see or to know. Although far, far away, He is also near to all.

Chapter 13 Verse 17
Sanskrit: avibhaktaṁ ca bhūteṣu vibhaktam iva ca sthitam bhūta-bhartṛ ca taj jñeyaṁ grasiṣṇu prabhaviṣṇu ca
Transliteration: avibhaktam — without division; ca — also; bhūteṣu — in all living beings; vibhaktam — divided; iva — as if; ca — also; sthitam — situated; bhūta-bhartṛ — the maintainer of all living entities; ca — also; tat — that; jñeyam — to be understood; grasiṣṇu — devouring; prabhaviṣṇu — developing; ca — also.
Translation: Although the Supersoul appears to be divided among all beings, He is never divided. He is situated as one. Although He is the maintainer of every living entity, it is to be understood that He devours and develops all.

Chapter 13 Verse 18
Sanskrit: jyotiṣām api taj jyotis tamasaḥ param ucyate jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ jñāna-gamyaṁ hṛdi sarvasya viṣṭhitam
Transliteration: jyotiṣām — in all luminous objects; api — also; tat — that; jyotiḥ — the source of light; tamasaḥ — the darkness; param — beyond; ucyate — is said; jñānam — knowledge; jñeyam — to be known; jñāna-gamyam — to be approached by knowledge; hṛdi — in the heart; sarvasya — of everyone; viṣṭhitam — situated.
Translation: He is the source of light in all luminous objects. He is beyond the darkness of matter and is unmanifested. He is knowledge, He is the object of knowledge, and He is the goal of knowledge. He is situated in everyone’s heart.

Chapter 13 Verse 19
Sanskrit: iti kṣetraṁ tathā jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ coktaṁ samāsataḥ mad-bhakta etad vijñāya mad-bhāvāyopapadyate
Transliteration: iti — thus; kṣetram — the field of activities (the body); tathā — also; jñānam — knowledge; jñeyam — the knowable; ca — also; uktam — described; samāsataḥ — in summary; mat-bhaktaḥ — My devotee; etat — all this; vijñāya — after understanding; mat-bhāvāya — to My nature; upapadyate — attains.
Translation: Thus the field of activities [the body], knowledge and the knowable have been summarily described by Me. Only My devotees can understand this thoroughly and thus attain to My nature.

Chapter 13 Verse 20
Sanskrit: prakṛtiṁ puruṣaṁ caiva viddhy anādī ubhāv api vikārāṁś ca guṇāṁś caiva viddhi prakṛti-sambhavān
Transliteration: prakṛtim — material nature; puruṣam — the living entities; ca — also; eva — certainly; viddhi — you must know; anādī — without beginning; ubhau — both; api — also; vikārān — transformations; ca — also; guṇān — the three modes of nature; ca — also; eva — certainly; viddhi — know; prakṛti — material nature; sambhavān — produced of.
Translation: Material nature and the living entities should be understood to be beginningless. Their transformations and the modes of matter are products of material nature.

Chapter 13 Verse 21
Sanskrit: kārya-kāraṇa-kartṛtve hetuḥ prakṛtir ucyate puruṣaḥ sukha-duḥkhānāṁ bhoktṛtve hetur ucyate
Transliteration: kārya — of effect; kāraṇa — and cause; kartṛtve — in the matter of creation; hetuḥ — the instrument; prakṛtiḥ — material nature; ucyate — is said to be; puruṣaḥ — the living entity; sukha — of happiness; duḥkhānām — and distress; bhoktṛtve — in enjoyment; hetuḥ — the instrument; ucyate — is said to be.
Translation: Nature is said to be the cause of all material causes and effects, whereas the living entity is the cause of the various sufferings and enjoyments in this world.

Chapter 13 Verse 22
Sanskrit: puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo ’sya sad-asad-yoni-janmasu
Transliteration: puruṣaḥ — the living entity; prakṛti-sthaḥ — being situated in the material energy; hi — certainly; bhuṅkte — enjoys; prakṛti-jān — produced by the material nature; guṇān — the modes of nature; kāraṇam — the cause; guṇa-saṅgaḥ — the association with the modes of nature; asya — of the living entity; sat-asat — in good and bad; yoni — species of life; janmasu — in births.
Translation: The living entity in material nature thus follows the ways of life, enjoying the three modes of nature. This is due to his association with that material nature. Thus he meets with good and evil among various species.

Chapter 13 Verse 23
Sanskrit: upadraṣṭānumantā ca bhartā bhoktā maheśvaraḥ paramātmeti cāpy ukto dehe ’smin puruṣaḥ paraḥ
Transliteration: upadraṣṭā — overseer; anumantā — permitter; ca — also; bhartā — master; bhoktā — supreme enjoyer; mahā-īśvaraḥ — the Supreme Lord; parama-ātmā — the Supersoul; iti — also; ca — and; api — indeed; uktaḥ — is said; dehe — in the body; asmin — this; puruṣaḥ — enjoyer; paraḥ — transcendental.
Translation: Yet in this body there is another, a transcendental enjoyer, who is the Lord, the supreme proprietor, who exists as the overseer and permitter, and who is known as the Supersoul.

Chapter 13 Verse 24
Sanskrit: ya evaṁ vetti puruṣaṁ prakṛtiṁ ca guṇaiḥ saha sarvathā vartamāno ’pi na sa bhūyo ’bhijāyate
Transliteration: yaḥ — anyone who; evam — thus; vetti — understands; puruṣam — the living entity; prakṛtim — material nature; ca — and; guṇaiḥ — the modes of material nature; saha — with; sarvathā — in all ways; vartamānaḥ — being situated; api — in spite of; na — never; saḥ — he; bhūyaḥ — again; abhijāyate — takes his birth.
Translation: One who understands this philosophy concerning material nature, the living entity and the interaction of the modes of nature is sure to attain liberation. He will not take birth here again, regardless of his present position.

Chapter 13 Verse 25
Sanskrit: dhyānenātmani paśyanti kecid ātmānam ātmanā anye sāṅkhyena yogena karma-yogena cāpare
Transliteration: dhyānena — by meditation; ātmani — within the self; paśyanti — see; kecit — some; ātmānam — the Supersoul; ātmanā — by the mind; anye — others; sāṅkhyena — of philosophical discussion; yogena — by the yoga system; karma-yogena — by activities without fruitive desire; ca — also; apare — others.
Translation: Some perceive the Supersoul within themselves through meditation, others through the cultivation of knowledge, and still others through working without fruitive desires.

Chapter 13 Verse 26
Sanskrit: anye tv evam ajānantaḥ śrutvānyebhya upāsate te ’pi cātitaranty eva mṛtyuṁ śruti-parāyaṇāḥ
Transliteration: anye — others; tu — but; evam — thus; ajānantaḥ — without spiritual knowledge; śrutvā — by hearing; anyebhyaḥ — from others; upāsate — begin to worship; te — they; api — also; ca — and; atitaranti — transcend; eva — certainly; mṛtyum — the path of death; śruti-parāyaṇāḥ — inclined to the process of hearing.
Translation: Again there are those who, although not conversant in spiritual knowledge, begin to worship the Supreme Person upon hearing about Him from others. Because of their tendency to hear from authorities, they also transcend the path of birth and death.

Chapter 13 Verse 27
Sanskrit: yāvat sañjāyate kiñcit sattvaṁ sthāvara-jaṅgamam kṣetra-kṣetrajña-saṁyogāt tad viddhi bharatarṣabha
Transliteration: yāvat — whatever; sañjāyate — comes into being; kiñcit — anything; sattvam — existence; sthāvara — not moving; jaṅgamam — moving; kṣetra — of the body; kṣetra-jña — and the knower of the body; saṁyogāt — by the union between; tat viddhi — you must know it; bharata-ṛṣabha — O chief of the Bhāratas.
Translation: O chief of the Bhāratas, know that whatever you see in existence, both the moving and the nonmoving, is only a combination of the field of activities and the knower of the field.

Chapter 13 Verse 28
Sanskrit: samaṁ sarveṣu bhūteṣu tiṣṭhantaṁ parameśvaram vinaśyatsv avinaśyantaṁ yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati
Transliteration: samam — equally; sarveṣu — in all; bhūteṣu — living entities; tiṣṭhan tam — residing; parama-īśvaram — the Supersoul; vinaśyatsu — in the destructible; avinaśyantam — not destroyed; yaḥ — anyone who; paśyati — sees; saḥ — he; paśyati — actually sees.
Translation: One who sees the Supersoul accompanying the individual soul in all bodies, and who understands that neither the soul nor the Supersoul within the destructible body is ever destroyed, actually sees.

Chapter 13 Verse 29
Sanskrit: samaṁ paśyan hi sarvatra samavasthitam īśvaram na hinasty ātmanātmānaṁ tato yāti parāṁ gatim
Transliteration: samam — equally; paśyan — seeing; hi — certainly; sarvatra — everywhere; samavasthitam — equally situated; īśvaram — the Supersoul; na — does not; hinasti — degrade; ātmanā — by the mind; ātmānam — the soul; tataḥ — then; yāti — reaches; parām — the transcendental; gatim — destination.
Translation: One who sees the Supersoul equally present everywhere, in every living being, does not degrade himself by his mind. Thus he approaches the transcendental destination.

Chapter 13 Verse 30
Sanskrit: prakṛtyaiva ca karmāṇi kriyamāṇāni sarvaśaḥ yaḥ paśyati tathātmānam akartāraṁ sa paśyati
Transliteration: prakṛtyā — by material nature; eva — certainly; ca — also; karmāṇi — activities; kriyamāṇāni — being performed; sarvaśaḥ — in all respects; yaḥ — anyone who; paśyati — sees; tathā — also; ātmānam — himself; akartāram — the nondoer; saḥ — he; paśyati — sees perfectly.
Translation: One who can see that all activities are performed by the body, which is created of material nature, and sees that the self does nothing, actually sees.

Chapter 13 Verse 31
Sanskrit: yadā bhūta-pṛthag-bhāvam eka-stham anupaśyati tata eva ca vistāraṁ brahma sampadyate tadā
Transliteration: yadā — when; bhūta — of living entities; pṛthak-bhāvam — separated identities; eka-stham — situated in one; anupaśyati — one tries to see through authority; tataḥ eva — thereafter; ca — also; vistāram — the expansion; brahma — the Absolute; sampadyate — he attains; tadā — at that time.
Translation: When a sensible man ceases to see different identities due to different material bodies and he sees how beings are expanded everywhere, he attains to the Brahman conception.

Chapter 13 Verse 32
Sanskrit: anāditvān nirguṇatvāt paramātmāyam avyayaḥ śarīra-stho ’pi kaunteya na karoti na lipyate
Transliteration: anāditvāt — due to eternity; nirguṇatvāt — due to being transcendental; parama — beyond material nature; ātmā — spirit; ayam — this; avyayaḥ — inexhaustible; śarīra-sthaḥ — dwelling in the body; api — though; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; na karoti — never does anything; na lipyate — nor is he entangled.
Translation: Those with the vision of eternity can see that the imperishable soul is transcendental, eternal, and beyond the modes of nature. Despite contact with the material body, O Arjuna, the soul neither does anything nor is entangled.

Chapter 13 Verse 33
Sanskrit: yathā sarva-gataṁ saukṣmyād ākāśaṁ nopalipyate sarvatrāvasthito dehe tathātmā nopalipyate
Transliteration: yathā — as; sarva-gatam — all-pervading; saukṣmyāt — due to being subtle; ākāśam — the sky; na — never; upalipyate — mixes; sarvatra — everywhere; avasthitaḥ — situated; dehe — in the body; tathā — so; ātmā — the self; na — never; upalipyate — mixes.
Translation: The sky, due to its subtle nature, does not mix with anything, although it is all-pervading. Similarly, the soul situated in Brahman vision does not mix with the body, though situated in that body.

Chapter 13 Verse 34
Sanskrit: yathā prakāśayaty ekaḥ kṛtsnaṁ lokam imaṁ raviḥ kṣetraṁ kṣetrī tathā kṛtsnaṁ prakāśayati bhārata
Transliteration: yathā — as; prakāśayati — illuminates; ekaḥ — one; kṛtsnam — the whole; lokam — universe; imam — this; raviḥ — sun; kṣetram — this body; kṣetrī — the soul; tathā — similarly; kṛtsnam — all; prakāśayati — illuminates; bhārata — O son of Bharata.
Translation: O son of Bharata, as the sun alone illuminates all this universe, so does the living entity, one within the body, illuminate the entire body by consciousness.

Chapter 13 Verse 35
Sanskrit: kṣetra-kṣetrajñayor evam antaraṁ jñāna-cakṣuṣā bhūta-prakṛti-mokṣaṁ ca ye vidur yānti te param
Transliteration: kṣetra — of the body; kṣetra-jñayoḥ — of the proprietor of the body; evam — thus; antaram — the difference; jñāna-cakṣuṣā — by the vision of knowledge; bhūta — of the living entity; prakṛti — from material nature; mokṣam — the liberation; ca — also; ye — those who; viduḥ — know; yānti — approach; te — they; param — the Supreme.
Translation: Those who see with eyes of knowledge the difference between the body and the knower of the body, and can also understand the process of liberation from bondage in material nature, attain to the supreme goal.
