Chapter 12 Verse 1
Sanskrit: arjuna uvāca evaṁ satata-yuktā ye bhaktās tvāṁ paryupāsate ye cāpy akṣaram avyaktaṁ teṣāṁ ke yoga-vittamāḥ
Transliteration: arjunaḥ uvāca — Arjuna said; evam — thus; satata — always; yuktāḥ — engaged; ye — those who; bhaktāḥ — devotees; tvām — You; paryupāsate — properly worship; ye — those who; ca — also; api — again; akṣaram — beyond the senses; avyaktam — the unmanifested; teṣām — of them; ke — who; yoga-vit-tamāḥ — the most perfect in knowledge of yoga..
Translation: Arjuna inquired: Which are considered to be more perfect, those who are always properly engaged in Your devotional service or those who worship the impersonal Brahman, the unmanifested?

Chapter 12 Verse 2
Sanskrit: śrī-bhagavān uvāca mayy āveśya mano ye māṁ nitya-yuktā upāsate śraddhayā parayopetās te me yukta-tamā matāḥ
Transliteration: śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; mayi — upon Me; āveśya — fixing; manaḥ — the mind; ye — those who; mām — Me; nitya — always; yuktāḥ — engaged; upāsate — worship; śraddhayā — with faith; parayā — transcendental; upetāḥ — endowed; te — they; me — by Me; yukta-tamāḥ — most perfect in yoga; matāḥ — are considered.
Translation: The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Those who fix their minds on My personal form and are always engaged in worshiping Me with great and transcendental faith are considered by Me to be most perfect.

Chapter 12 Verse 5
Sanskrit: kleśo ’dhika-taras teṣām avyaktāsakta-cetasām avyaktā hi gatir duḥkhaṁ dehavadbhir avāpyate
Transliteration: kleśaḥ — trouble; adhika-taraḥ — very much; teṣām — of them; avyakta — to the unmanifested; āsakta — attached; cetasām — of those whose minds; avyaktā — toward the unmanifested; hi — certainly; gatiḥ — progress; duḥkham — with trouble; deha-vadbhiḥ — by the embodied; avāpyate — is achieved.
Translation: For those whose minds are attached to the unmanifested, impersonal feature of the Supreme, advancement is very troublesome. To make progress in that discipline is always difficult for those who are embodied.

Chapter 12 Verse 8
Sanskrit: mayy eva mana ādhatsva mayi buddhiṁ niveśaya nivasiṣyasi mayy eva ata ūrdhvaṁ na saṁśayaḥ
Transliteration: mayi — upon Me; eva — certainly; manaḥ — mind; ādhatsva — fix; mayi — upon Me; buddhim — intelligence; niveśaya — apply; nivasiṣyasi — you will live; mayi — in Me; eva — certainly; ataḥ ūrdhvam — thereafter; na — never; saṁśayaḥ — doubt.
Translation: Just fix your mind upon Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and engage all your intelligence in Me. Thus you will live in Me always, without a doubt.

Chapter 12 Verse 9
Sanskrit: atha cittaṁ samādhātuṁ na śaknoṣi mayi sthiram abhyāsa-yogena tato mām icchāptuṁ dhanañ-jaya
Transliteration: atha — if, therefore; cittam — mind; samādhātum — to fix; na — not; śaknoṣi — you are able; mayi — upon Me; sthiram — steadily; abhyāsa-yogena — by the practice of devotional service; tataḥ — then; mām — Me; icchā — desire; āptum — to get; dhanam-jaya — O winner of wealth, Arjuna.
Translation: My dear Arjuna, O winner of wealth, if you cannot fix your mind upon Me without deviation, then follow the regulative principles of bhakti-yoga. In this way develop a desire to attain Me.

Chapter 12 Verse 10
Sanskrit: abhyāse ’py asamartho ’si mat-karma-paramo bhava mad-artham api karmāṇi kurvan siddhim avāpsyasi
Transliteration: abhyāse — in practice; api — even if; asamarthaḥ — unable; asi — you are; mat-karma — My work; paramaḥ — dedicated to; bhava — become; mat-artham — for My sake; api — even; karmāṇi — work; kurvan — performing; siddhim — perfection; avāpsyasi — you will achieve.
Translation: If you cannot practice the regulations of bhakti-yoga, then just try to work for Me, because by working for Me you will come to the perfect stage.

Chapter 12 Verse 11
Sanskrit: athaitad apy aśakto ’si kartuṁ mad-yogam āśritaḥ sarva-karma-phala-tyāgaṁ tataḥ kuru yatātmavān
Transliteration: atha — even though; etat — this; api — also; aśaktaḥ — unable; asi — you are; kartum — to perform; mat — unto Me; yogam — in devotional service; āśritaḥ — taking refuge; sarva-karma — of all activities; phala — of the results; tyāgam — renunciation; tataḥ — then; kuru — do; yata-ātma-vān — self-situated.
Translation: If, however, you are unable to work in this consciousness of Me, then try to act giving up all results of your work and try to be self-situated.

Chapter 12 Verse 12
Sanskrit: śreyo hi jñānam abhyāsāj jñānād dhyānaṁ viśiṣyate dhyānāt karma-phala-tyāgas tyāgāc chāntir anantaram
Transliteration: śreyaḥ — better; hi — certainly; jñānam — knowledge; abhyāsāt — than practice; jñānāt — than knowledge; dhyānam — meditation; viśiṣyate — is considered better; dhyānāt — than meditation; karma-phala-tyāgaḥ — renunciation of the results of fruitive action; tyāgāt — by such renunciation; śāntiḥ — peace; anantaram — thereafter.
Translation: If you cannot take to this practice, then engage yourself in the cultivation of knowledge. Better than knowledge, however, is meditation, and better than meditation is renunciation of the fruits of action, for by such renunciation one can attain peace of mind.

Chapter 12 Verse 15
Sanskrit: yasmān nodvijate loko lokān nodvijate ca yaḥ harṣāmarṣa-bhayodvegair mukto yaḥ sa ca me priyaḥ
Transliteration: yasmāt — from whom; na — never; udvijate — are agitated; lokaḥ — people; lokāt — from people; na — never; udvijate — is disturbed; ca — also; yaḥ — anyone who; harṣa — from happiness; amarṣa — distress; bhaya — fear; udvegaiḥ — and anxiety; muktaḥ — freed; yaḥ — who; saḥ — anyone; ca — also; me — to Me; priyaḥ — very dear.
Translation: He by whom no one is put into difficulty and who is not disturbed by anyone, who is equipoised in happiness and distress, fear and anxiety, is very dear to Me.

Chapter 12 Verse 16
Sanskrit: anapekṣaḥ śucir dakṣa udāsīno gata-vyathaḥ sarvārambha-parityāgī yo mad-bhaktaḥ sa me priyaḥ
Transliteration: anapekṣaḥ — neutral; śuciḥ — pure; dakṣaḥ — expert; udāsīnaḥ — free from care; gata-vyathaḥ — freed from all distress; sarva-ārambha — of all endeavors; parityāgī — renouncer; yaḥ — anyone who; mat-bhaktaḥ — My devotee; saḥ — he; me — to Me; priyaḥ — very dear.
Translation: My devotee who is not dependent on the ordinary course of activities, who is pure, expert, without cares, free from all pains, and not striving for some result, is very dear to Me.

Chapter 12 Verse 17
Sanskrit: yo na hṛṣyati na dveṣṭi na śocati na kāṅkṣati śubhāśubha-parityāgī bhaktimān yaḥ sa me priyaḥ
Transliteration: yaḥ — one who; na — never; hṛṣyati — takes pleasure; na — never; dveṣṭi — grieves; na — never; śocati — laments; na — never; kāṅkṣati — desires; śubha — of the auspicious; aśubha — and the inauspicious; parityāgī — renouncer; bhakti-mān — devotee; yaḥ — one who; saḥ — he is; me — to Me; priyaḥ — dear.
Translation: One who neither rejoices nor grieves, who neither laments nor desires, and who renounces both auspicious and inauspicious things – such a devotee is very dear to Me.

Chapter 12 Verse 20
Sanskrit: ye tu dharmāmṛtam idaṁ yathoktaṁ paryupāsate śraddadhānā mat-paramā bhaktās te ’tīva me priyāḥ
Transliteration: ye — those who; tu — but; dharma — of religion; amṛtam — nectar; idam — this; yathā — as; uktam — said; paryupāsate — completely engage; śraddadhānāḥ — with faith; mat-paramāḥ — taking Me, the Supreme Lord, as everything; bhaktāḥ — devotees; te — they; atīva — very, very; me — to Me; priyāḥ — dear.
Translation: Those who follow this imperishable path of devotional service and who completely engage themselves with faith, making Me the supreme goal, are very, very dear to Me.
