Chapter 18 Verse 1
Sanskrit: arjuna uvāca sannyāsasya mahā-bāho tattvam icchāmi veditum tyāgasya ca hṛṣīkeśa pṛthak keśi-niṣūdana
Transliteration: arjunaḥ uvāca — Arjuna said; sannyāsasya — of renunciation; mahā-bāho — O mighty-armed one; tattvam — the truth; icchāmi — I wish; veditum — to understand; tyāgasya — of renunciation; ca — also; hṛṣīkeśa — O master of the senses; pṛthak — differently; keśi-niṣūdana — O killer of the Keśī demon.
Translation: Arjuna said: O mighty-armed one, I wish to understand the purpose of renunciation [tyāga] and of the renounced order of life [sannyāsa], O killer of the Keśī demon, master of the senses.

Chapter 18 Verse 2
Sanskrit: śrī-bhagavān uvāca kāmyānāṁ karmaṇāṁ nyāsaṁ sannyāsaṁ kavayo viduḥ sarva-karma-phala-tyāgaṁ prāhus tyāgaṁ vicakṣaṇāḥ
Transliteration: śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; kāmyānām — with desire; karmaṇām — of activities; nyāsam — renunciation; sannyāsam — the renounced order of life; kavayaḥ — the learned; viduḥ — know; sarva — of all; karma — activities; phala — of results; tyāgam — renunciation; prāhuḥ — call; tyāgam — renunciation; vicakṣaṇāḥ — the experienced.
Translation: The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: The giving up of activities that are based on material desire is what great learned men call the renounced order of life [sannyāsa]. And giving up the results of all activities is what the wise call renunciation [tyāga].

Chapter 18 Verse 3
Sanskrit: tyājyaṁ doṣa-vad ity eke karma prāhur manīṣiṇaḥ yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma na tyājyam iti cāpare
Transliteration: tyājyam — must be given up; doṣa-vat — as an evil; iti — thus; eke — one group; karma — work; prāhuḥ — they say; manīṣiṇaḥ — great thinkers; yajña — of sacrifice; dāna — charity; tapaḥ — and penance; karma — works; na — never; tyājyam — are to be given up; iti — thus; ca — and; apare — others.
Translation: Some learned men declare that all kinds of fruitive activities should be given up as faulty, yet other sages maintain that acts of sacrifice, charity and penance should never be abandoned.

Chapter 18 Verse 4
Sanskrit: niścayaṁ śṛṇu me tatra tyāge bharata-sattama tyāgo hi puruṣa-vyāghra tri-vidhaḥ samprakīrtitaḥ
Transliteration: niścayam — certainty; śṛṇu — hear; me — from Me; tatra — therein; tyāge — in the matter of renunciation; bharata-sat-tama — O best of the Bhāratas; tyāgaḥ — renunciation; hi — certainly; puruṣa-vyāghra — O tiger among human beings; tri-vidhaḥ — of three kinds; samprakīrtitaḥ — is declared.
Translation: O best of the Bhāratas, now hear My judgment about renunciation. O tiger among men, renunciation is declared in the scriptures to be of three kinds.

Chapter 18 Verse 5
Sanskrit: yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma na tyājyaṁ kāryam eva tat yajño dānaṁ tapaś caiva pāvanāni manīṣiṇām
Transliteration: yajña — of sacrifice; dāna — charity; tapaḥ — and penance; karma — activity; na — never; tyājyam — to be given up; kāryam — must be done; eva — certainly; tat — that; yajñaḥ — sacrifice; dānam — charity; tapaḥ — penance; ca — also; eva — certainly; pāvanāni — purifying; manīṣiṇām — even for the great souls.
Translation: Acts of sacrifice, charity and penance are not to be given up; they must be performed. Indeed, sacrifice, charity and penance purify even the great souls.

Chapter 18 Verse 6
Sanskrit: etāny api tu karmāṇi saṅgaṁ tyaktvā phalāni ca kartavyānīti me pārtha niścitaṁ matam uttamam
Transliteration: etāni — all these; api — certainly; tu — but; karmāṇi — activities; saṅgam — association; tyaktvā — renouncing; phalāni — results; ca — also; kartavyāni — should be done as duty; iti — thus; me — My; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; niścitam — definite; matam — opinion; uttamam — the best.
Translation: All these activities should be performed without attachment or any expectation of result. They should be performed as a matter of duty, O son of Pṛthā. That is My final opinion.

Chapter 18 Verse 7
Sanskrit: niyatasya tu sannyāsaḥ karmaṇo nopapadyate mohāt tasya parityāgas tāmasaḥ parikīrtitaḥ
Transliteration: niyatasya — prescribed; tu — but; sannyāsaḥ — renunciation; karmaṇaḥ — of activities; na — never; upapadyate — is deserved; mohāt — by illusion; tasya — of them; parityāgaḥ — renunciation; tāmasaḥ — in the mode of ignorance; parikīrtitaḥ — is declared.
Translation: Prescribed duties should never be renounced. If one gives up his prescribed duties because of illusion, such renunciation is said to be in the mode of ignorance.

Chapter 18 Verse 8
Sanskrit: duḥkham ity eva yat karma kāya-kleśa-bhayāt tyajet sa kṛtvā rājasaṁ tyāgaṁ naiva tyāga-phalaṁ labhet
Transliteration: duḥkham — unhappy; iti — thus; eva — certainly; yat — which; karma — work; kāya — for the body; kleśa — trouble; bhayāt — out of fear; tyajet — gives up; saḥ — he; kṛtvā — after doing; rājasam — in the mode of passion; tyāgam — renunciation; na — not; eva — certainly; tyāga — of renunciation; phalam — the results; labhet — gains.
Translation: Anyone who gives up prescribed duties as troublesome or out of fear of bodily discomfort is said to have renounced in the mode of passion. Such action never leads to the elevation of renunciation.

Chapter 18 Verse 9
Sanskrit: kāryam ity eva yat karma niyataṁ kriyate ’rjuna saṅgaṁ tyaktvā phalaṁ caiva sa tyāgaḥ sāttviko mataḥ
Transliteration: kāryam — it must be done; iti — thus; eva — indeed; yat — which; karma — work; niyatam — prescribed; kriyate — is performed; arjuna — O Arjuna; saṅgam — association; tyaktvā — giving up; phalam — the result; ca — also; eva — certainly; saḥ — that; tyāgaḥ — renunciation; sāttvikaḥ — in the mode of goodness; mataḥ — in My opinion.
Translation: O Arjuna, when one performs his prescribed duty only because it ought to be done, and renounces all material association and all attachment to the fruit, his renunciation is said to be in the mode of goodness.

Chapter 18 Verse 10
Sanskrit: na dveṣṭy akuśalaṁ karma kuśale nānuṣajjate tyāgī sattva-samāviṣṭo medhāvī chinna-saṁśayaḥ
Transliteration: na — never; dveṣṭi — hates; akuśalam — inauspicious; karma — work; kuśale — in the auspicious; na — nor; anuṣajjate — becomes attached; tyāgī — the renouncer; sattva — in goodness; samāviṣṭaḥ — absorbed; medhāvī — intelligent; chinna — having cut off; saṁśayaḥ — all doubts.
Translation: The intelligent renouncer situated in the mode of goodness, neither hateful of inauspicious work nor attached to auspicious work, has no doubts about work.

Chapter 18 Verse 11
Sanskrit: na hi deha-bhṛtā śakyaṁ tyaktuṁ karmāṇy aśeṣataḥ yas tu karma-phala-tyāgī sa tyāgīty abhidhīyate
Transliteration: na — never; hi — certainly; deha-bhṛtā — by the embodied; śakyam — is possible; tyaktum — to be renounced; karmāṇi — activities; aśeṣataḥ — altogether; yaḥ — anyone who; tu — but; karma — of work; phala — of the result; tyāgī — the renouncer; saḥ — he; tyāgī — the renouncer; iti — thus; abhidhīyate — is said.
Translation: It is indeed impossible for an embodied being to give up all activities. But he who renounces the fruits of action is called one who has truly renounced.

Chapter 18 Verse 12
Sanskrit: aniṣṭam iṣṭaṁ miśraṁ ca tri-vidhaṁ karmaṇaḥ phalam bhavaty atyāgināṁ pretya na tu sannyāsināṁ kvacit
Transliteration: aniṣṭam — leading to hell; iṣṭam — leading to heaven; miśram — mixed; ca — and; tri-vidham — of three kinds; karmaṇaḥ — of work; phalam — the result; bhavati — comes; atyāginām — for those who are not renounced; pretya — after death; na — not; tu — but; sannyāsinām — for the renounced order; kvacit — at any time.
Translation: For one who is not renounced, the threefold fruits of action – desirable, undesirable and mixed – accrue after death. But those who are in the renounced order of life have no such result to suffer or enjoy.

Chapter 18 Verse 13
Sanskrit: pañcaitāni mahā-bāho kāraṇāni nibodha me sāṅkhye kṛtānte proktāni siddhaye sarva-karmaṇām
Transliteration: pañca — five; etāni — these; mahā-bāho — O mighty-armed one; kāraṇāni — causes; nibodha — just understand; me — from Me; sāṅkhye — in the Vedānta; kṛta-ante — in the conclusion; proktāni — said; siddhaye — for the perfection; sarva — of all; karmaṇām — activities.
Translation: O mighty-armed Arjuna, according to the Vedānta there are five causes for the accomplishment of all action. Now learn of these from Me.

Chapter 18 Verse 14
Sanskrit: adhiṣṭhānaṁ tathā kartā karaṇaṁ ca pṛthag-vidham vividhāś ca pṛthak ceṣṭā daivaṁ caivātra pañcamam
Transliteration: adhiṣṭhānam — the place; tathā — also; kartā — the worker; karaṇam — instruments; ca — and; pṛthak-vidham — of different kinds; vividhāḥ — various; ca — and; pṛthak — separate; ceṣṭāḥ — the endeavors; daivam — the Supreme; ca — also; eva — certainly; atra — here; pañcamam — the fifth.
Translation: The place of action [the body], the performer, the various senses, the many different kinds of endeavor, and ultimately the Supersoul – these are the five factors of action.

Chapter 18 Verse 15
Sanskrit: śarīra-vāṅ-manobhir yat karma prārabhate naraḥ nyāyyaṁ vā viparītaṁ vā pañcaite tasya hetavaḥ
Transliteration: śarīra — by the body; vāk — speech; manobhiḥ — and mind; yat — which; karma — work; prārabhate — begins; naraḥ — a person; nyāyyam — right; vā — or; viparītam — the opposite; vā — or; pañca — five; ete — all these; tasya — its; hetavaḥ — causes.
Translation: Whatever right or wrong action a man performs by body, mind or speech is caused by these five factors.

Chapter 18 Verse 16
Sanskrit: tatraivaṁ sati kartāram ātmānaṁ kevalaṁ tu yaḥ paśyaty akṛta-buddhitvān na sa paśyati durmatiḥ
Transliteration: tatra — there; evam — thus; sati — being; kartāram — the worker; ātmānam — himself; kevalam — only; tu — but; yaḥ — anyone who; paśyati — sees; akṛta-buddhitvāt — due to unintelligence; na — never; saḥ — he; paśyati — sees; durmatiḥ — foolish.
Translation: Therefore one who thinks himself the only doer, not considering the five factors, is certainly not very intelligent and cannot see things as they are.

Chapter 18 Verse 17
Sanskrit: yasya nāhaṅkṛto bhāvo buddhir yasya na lipyate hatvāpi sa imāḻ lokān na hanti na nibadhyate
Transliteration: yasya — one whose; na — never; ahaṅkṛtaḥ — of false ego; bhāvaḥ — nature; buddhiḥ — intelligence; yasya — one whose; na — never; lipyate — is attached; hatvā — killing; api — even; saḥ — he; imān — this; lokān — world; na — never; hanti — kills; na — never; nibadhyate — becomes entangled.
Translation: One who is not motivated by false ego, whose intelligence is not entangled, though he kills men in this world, does not kill. Nor is he bound by his actions.

Chapter 18 Verse 18
Sanskrit: jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ parijñātā tri-vidhā karma-codanā karaṇaṁ karma karteti tri-vidhaḥ karma-saṅgrahaḥ
Transliteration: jñānam — knowledge; jñeyam — the objective of knowledge; parijñātā — the knower; tri-vidhā — of three kinds; karma — of work; codanā — the impetus; karaṇam — the senses; karma — the work; kartā — the doer; iti — thus; tri-vidhaḥ — of three kinds; karma — of work; saṅgrahaḥ — the accumulation.
Translation: Knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower are the three factors that motivate action; the senses, the work and the doer are the three constituents of action.

Chapter 18 Verse 19
Sanskrit: jñānaṁ karma ca kartā ca tridhaiva guṇa-bhedataḥ procyate guṇa-saṅkhyāne yathāvac chṛṇu tāny api
Transliteration: jñānam — knowledge; karma — work; ca — also; kartā — worker; ca — also; tridhā — of three kinds; eva — certainly; guṇa-bhedataḥ — in terms of different modes of material nature; procyate — are said; guṇa-saṅkhyāne — in terms of different modes; yathā-vat — as they are; śṛṇu — hear; tāni — all of them; api — also.
Translation: According to the three different modes of material nature, there are three kinds of knowledge, action and performer of action. Now hear of them from Me.

Chapter 18 Verse 20
Sanskrit: sarva-bhūteṣu yenaikaṁ bhāvam avyayam īkṣate avibhaktaṁ vibhakteṣu taj jñānaṁ viddhi sāttvikam
Transliteration: sarva-bhūteṣu — in all living entities; yena — by which; ekam — one; bhāvam — situation; avyayam — imperishable; īkṣate — one sees; avibhaktam — undivided; vibhakteṣu — in the numberless divided; tat — that; jñānam — knowledge; viddhi — know; sāttvikam — in the mode of goodness.
Translation: That knowledge by which one undivided spiritual nature is seen in all living entities, though they are divided into innumerable forms, you should understand to be in the mode of goodness.

Chapter 18 Verse 21
Sanskrit: pṛthaktvena tu yaj jñānaṁ nānā-bhāvān pṛthag-vidhān vetti sarveṣu bhūteṣu taj jñānaṁ viddhi rājasam
Transliteration: pṛthaktvena — because of division; tu — but; yat — which; jñānam — knowledge; nānā-bhāvān — multifarious situations; pṛthak-vidhān — different; vetti — knows; sarveṣu — in all; bhūteṣu — living entities; tat — that; jñānam — knowledge; viddhi — must be known; rājasam — in terms of passion.
Translation: That knowledge by which one sees that in every different body there is a different type of living entity you should understand to be in the mode of passion.

Chapter 18 Verse 22
Sanskrit: yat tu kṛtsna-vad ekasmin kārye saktam ahaitukam atattvārtha-vad alpaṁ ca tat tāmasam udāhṛtam
Transliteration: yat — that which; tu — but; kṛtsna-vat — as all in all; ekasmin — in one; kārye — work; saktam — attached; ahaitukam — without cause; atattva-artha-vat — without knowledge of reality; alpam — very meager; ca — and; tat — that; tāmasam — in the mode of darkness; udāhṛtam — is said to be.
Translation: And that knowledge by which one is attached to one kind of work as the all in all, without knowledge of the truth, and which is very meager, is said to be in the mode of darkness.

Chapter 18 Verse 23
Sanskrit: niyataṁ saṅga-rahitam arāga-dveṣataḥ kṛtam aphala-prepsunā karma yat tat sāttvikam ucyate
Transliteration: niyatam — regulated; saṅga-rahitam — without attachment; arāga-dveṣataḥ — without love or hatred; kṛtam — done; aphala-prepsunā — by one without desire for fruitive result; karma — action; yat — which; tat — that; sāttvikam — in the mode of goodness; ucyate — is called.
Translation: That action which is regulated and which is performed without attachment, without love or hatred, and without desire for fruitive results is said to be in the mode of goodness.

Chapter 18 Verse 24
Sanskrit: yat tu kāmepsunā karma sāhaṅkāreṇa vā punaḥ kriyate bahulāyāsaṁ tad rājasam udāhṛtam
Transliteration: yat — that which; tu — but; kāma-īpsunā — by one with desires for fruitive results; karma — work; sa-ahaṅkāreṇa — with ego; vā — or; punaḥ — again; kriyate — is performed; bahula-āyāsam — with great labor; tat — that; rājasam — in the mode of passion; udāhṛtam — is said to be.
Translation: But action performed with great effort by one seeking to gratify his desires, and enacted from a sense of false ego, is called action in the mode of passion.

Chapter 18 Verse 25
Sanskrit: anubandhaṁ kṣayaṁ hiṁsām anapekṣya ca pauruṣam mohād ārabhyate karma yat tat tāmasam ucyate
Transliteration: anubandham — of future bondage; kṣayam — destruction; hiṁsām — and distress to others; anapekṣya — without considering the consequences; ca — also; pauruṣam — self-sanctioned; mohāt — by illusion; ārabhyate — is begun; karma — work; yat — which; tat — that; tāmasam — in the mode of ignorance; ucyate — is said to be.
Translation: That action performed in illusion, in disregard of scriptural injunctions, and without concern for future bondage or for violence or distress caused to others is said to be in the mode of ignorance.

Chapter 18 Verse 26
Sanskrit: mukta-saṅgo ’nahaṁ-vādī dhṛty-utsāha-samanvitaḥ siddhy-asiddhyor nirvikāraḥ kartā sāttvika ucyate
Transliteration: mukta-saṅgaḥ — liberated from all material association; anaham-vādī — without false ego; dhṛti — with determination; utsāha — and great enthusiasm; samanvitaḥ — qualified; siddhi — in perfection; asiddhyoḥ — and failure; nirvikāraḥ — without change; kartā — worker; sāttvikaḥ — in the mode of goodness; ucyate — is said to be.
Translation: One who performs his duty without association with the modes of material nature, without false ego, with great determination and enthusiasm, and without wavering in success or failure is said to be a worker in the mode of goodness.

Chapter 18 Verse 27
Sanskrit: rāgī karma-phala-prepsur lubdho hiṁsātmako ’śuciḥ harṣa-śokānvitaḥ kartā rājasaḥ parikīrtitaḥ
Transliteration: rāgī — very much attached; karma-phala — the fruit of the work; prepsuḥ — desiring; lubdhaḥ — greedy; hiṁsā-ātmakaḥ — always envious; aśuciḥ — unclean; harṣa-śoka-anvitaḥ — subject to joy and sorrow; kartā — such a worker; rājasaḥ — in the mode of passion; parikīrtitaḥ — is declared.
Translation: The worker who is attached to work and the fruits of work, desiring to enjoy those fruits, and who is greedy, always envious, impure, and moved by joy and sorrow, is said to be in the mode of passion.

Chapter 18 Verse 28
Sanskrit: ayuktaḥ prākṛtaḥ stabdhaḥ śaṭho naiṣkṛtiko ’lasaḥ viṣādī dīrgha-sūtrī ca kartā tāmasa ucyate
Transliteration: ayuktaḥ — not referring to the scriptural injunctions; prākṛtaḥ — materialistic; stabdhaḥ — obstinate; śaṭhaḥ — deceitful; naiṣkṛtikaḥ — expert in insulting others; alasaḥ — lazy; viṣādī — morose; dīrgha-sūtrī — procrastinating; ca — also; kartā — worker; tāmasaḥ — in the mode of ignorance; ucyate — is said to be.
Translation: The worker who is always engaged in work against the injunctions of the scripture, who is materialistic, obstinate, cheating and expert in insulting others, and who is lazy, always morose and procrastinating is said to be a worker in the mode of ignorance.

Chapter 18 Verse 29
Sanskrit: buddher bhedaṁ dhṛteś caiva guṇatas tri-vidhaṁ śṛṇu procyamānam aśeṣeṇa pṛthaktvena dhanañ-jaya
Transliteration: buddheḥ — of intelligence; bhedam — the differences; dhṛteḥ — of steadiness; ca — also; eva — certainly; guṇataḥ — by the modes of material nature; tri-vidham — of three kinds; śṛṇu — just hear; procyamānam — as described by Me; aśeṣeṇa — in detail; pṛthaktvena — differently; dhanam-jaya — O winner of wealth.
Translation: O winner of wealth, now please listen as I tell you in detail of the different kinds of understanding and determination, according to the three modes of material nature.

Chapter 18 Verse 30
Sanskrit: pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca kāryākārye bhayābhaye bandhaṁ mokṣaṁ ca yā vetti buddhiḥ sā pārtha sāttvikī
Transliteration: pravṛttim — doing; ca — also; nivṛttim — not doing; ca — and; kārya — what ought to be done; akārye — and what ought not to be done; bhaya — fear; abhaye — and fearlessness; bandham — bondage; mokṣam — liberation; ca — and; yā — that which; vetti — knows; buddhiḥ — understanding; sā — that; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; sāttvikī — in the mode of goodness.
Translation: O son of Pṛthā, that understanding by which one knows what ought to be done and what ought not to be done, what is to be feared and what is not to be feared, what is binding and what is liberating, is in the mode of goodness.

Chapter 18 Verse 31
Sanskrit: yayā dharmam adharmaṁ ca kāryaṁ cākāryam eva ca ayathāvat prajānāti buddhiḥ sā pārtha rājasī
Transliteration: yayā — by which; dharmam — the principles of religion; adharmam — irreligion; ca — and; kāryam — what ought to be done; ca — also; akāryam — what ought not to be done; eva — certainly; ca — also; ayathā-vat — imperfectly; prajānāti — knows; buddhiḥ — intelligence; sā — that; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; rājasī — in the mode of passion.
Translation: O son of Pṛthā, that understanding which cannot distinguish between religion and irreligion, between action that should be done and action that should not be done, is in the mode of passion.

Chapter 18 Verse 32
Sanskrit: adharmaṁ dharmam iti yā manyate tamasāvṛtā sarvārthān viparītāṁś ca buddhiḥ sā pārtha tāmasī
Transliteration: adharmam — irreligion; dharmam — religion; iti — thus; yā — which; manyate — thinks; tamasā — by illusion; āvṛtā — covered; sarva-arthān — all things; viparītān — in the wrong direction; ca — also; buddhiḥ — intelligence; sā — that; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; tāmasī — in the mode of ignorance.
Translation: That understanding which considers irreligion to be religion and religion to be irreligion, under the spell of illusion and darkness, and strives always in the wrong direction, O Pārtha, is in the mode of ignorance.

Chapter 18 Verse 33
Sanskrit: dhṛtyā yayā dhārayate manaḥ-prāṇendriya-kriyāḥ yogenāvyabhicāriṇyā dhṛtiḥ sā pārtha sāttvikī
Transliteration: dhṛtyā — determination; yayā — by which; dhārayate — one sustains; manaḥ — of the mind; prāṇa — life; indriya — and senses; kriyāḥ — the activities; yogena — by yoga practice; avyabhicāriṇyā — without any break; dhṛtiḥ — determination; sā — that; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; sāttvikī — in the mode of goodness.
Translation: O son of Pṛthā, that determination which is unbreakable, which is sustained with steadfastness by yoga practice, and which thus controls the activities of the mind, life and senses is determination in the mode of goodness.

Chapter 18 Verse 34
Sanskrit: yayā tu dharma-kāmārthān dhṛtyā dhārayate ’rjuna prasaṅgena phalākāṅkṣī dhṛtiḥ sā pārtha rājasī
Transliteration: yayā — by which; tu — but; dharma — religiosity; kāma — sense gratification; arthān — and economic development; dhṛtyā — by determination; dhārayate — one sustains; arjuna — O Arjuna; prasaṅgena — because of attachment; phala-ākāṅkṣī — desiring fruitive results; dhṛtiḥ — determination; sā — that; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; rājasī — in the mode of passion.
Translation: But that determination by which one holds fast to fruitive results in religion, economic development and sense gratification is of the nature of passion, O Arjuna.

Chapter 18 Verse 35
Sanskrit: yayā svapnaṁ bhayaṁ śokaṁ viṣādaṁ madam eva ca na vimuñcati durmedhā dhṛtiḥ sā pārtha tāmasī
Transliteration: yayā — by which; svapnam — dreaming; bhayam — fearfulness; śokam — lamentation; viṣādam — moroseness; madam — illusion; eva — certainly; ca — also; na — never; vimuñcati — one gives up; durmedhā — unintelligent; dhṛtiḥ — determination; sā — that; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; tāmasī — in the mode of ignorance.
Translation: And that determination which cannot go beyond dreaming, fearfulness, lamentation, moroseness and illusion – such unintelligent determination, O son of Pṛthā, is in the mode of darkness.

Chapter 18 Verse 36
Sanskrit: sukhaṁ tv idānīṁ tri-vidhaṁ śṛṇu me bharatarṣabha abhyāsād ramate yatra duḥkhāntaṁ ca nigacchati
Transliteration: sukham — happiness; tu — but; idānīm — now; tri-vidham — of three kinds; śṛṇu — hear; me — from Me; bharata-ṛṣabha — O best amongst the Bhāratas; abhyāsāt — by practice; ramate — one enjoys; yatra — where; duḥkha — of distress; antam — the end; ca — also; nigacchati — gains.
Translation: O best of the Bhāratas, now please hear from Me about the three kinds of happiness by which the conditioned soul enjoys, and by which he sometimes comes to the end of all distress.

Chapter 18 Verse 37
Sanskrit: yat tad agre viṣam iva pariṇāme ’mṛtopamam tat sukhaṁ sāttvikaṁ proktam ātma-buddhi-prasāda-jam
Transliteration: yat — which; tat — that; agre — in the beginning; viṣam iva — like poison; pariṇāme — at the end; amṛta — nectar; upamam — compared to; tat — that; sukham — happiness; sāttvikam — in the mode of goodness; proktam — is said; ātma — in the self; buddhi — of intelligence; prasāda-jam — born of the satisfaction.
Translation: That which in the beginning may be just like poison but at the end is just like nectar and which awakens one to self-realization is said to be happiness in the mode of goodness.

Chapter 18 Verse 38
Sanskrit: viṣayendriya-saṁyogād yat tad agre ’mṛtopamam pariṇāme viṣam iva tat sukhaṁ rājasaṁ smṛtam
Transliteration: viṣaya — of the objects of the senses; indriya — and the senses; saṁyogāt — from the combination; yat — which; tat — that; agre — in the beginning; amṛta-upamam — just like nectar; pariṇāme — at the end; viṣam iva — like poison; tat — that; sukham — happiness; rājasam — in the mode of passion; smṛtam — is considered.
Translation: That happiness which is derived from contact of the senses with their objects and which appears like nectar at first but poison at the end is said to be of the nature of passion.

Chapter 18 Verse 39
Sanskrit: yad agre cānubandhe ca sukhaṁ mohanam ātmanaḥ nidrālasya-pramādotthaṁ tat tāmasam udāhṛtam
Transliteration: yat — that which; agre — in the beginning; ca — also; anubandhe — at the end; ca — also; sukham — happiness; mohanam — illusory; ātmanaḥ — of the self; nidrā — sleep; ālasya — laziness; pramāda — and illusion; uttham — produced of; tat — that; tāmasam — in the mode of ignorance; udāhṛtam — is said to be.
Translation: And that happiness which is blind to self-realization, which is delusion from beginning to end and which arises from sleep, laziness and illusion is said to be of the nature of ignorance.

Chapter 18 Verse 40
Sanskrit: na tad asti pṛthivyāṁ vā divi deveṣu vā punaḥ sattvaṁ prakṛti-jair muktaṁ yad ebhiḥ syāt tribhir guṇaiḥ
Transliteration: na — not; tat — that; asti — there is; pṛthivyām — on the earth; vā — or; divi — in the higher planetary system; deveṣu — amongst the demigods; vā — or; punaḥ — again; sattvam — existence; prakṛti-jaiḥ — born of material nature; muktam — liberated; yat — that; ebhiḥ — from the influence of these; syāt — is; tribhiḥ — three; guṇaiḥ — modes of material nature.
Translation: There is no being existing, either here or among the demigods in the higher planetary systems, which is freed from these three modes born of material nature.

Chapter 18 Verse 41
Sanskrit: brāhmaṇa-kṣatriya-viśāṁ śūdrāṇāṁ ca paran-tapa karmāṇi pravibhaktāni svabhāva-prabhavair guṇaiḥ
Transliteration: brāhmaṇa — of the brāhmaṇas; kṣatriya — the kṣatriyas; viśām — and the vaiśyas; śūdrāṇām — of the śūdras; ca — and; param-tapa — O subduer of the enemies; karmāṇi — the activities; pravibhaktāni — are divided; svabhāva — their own nature; prabhavaiḥ — born of; guṇaiḥ — by the modes of material nature.
Translation: Brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras are distinguished by the qualities born of their own natures in accordance with the material modes, O chastiser of the enemy.

Chapter 18 Verse 42
Sanskrit: śamo damas tapaḥ śaucaṁ kṣāntir ārjavam eva ca jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ brahma-karma svabhāva-jam
Transliteration: śamaḥ — peacefulness; damaḥ — self-control; tapaḥ — austerity; śaucam — purity; kṣāntiḥ — tolerance; ārjavam — honesty; eva — certainly; ca — and; jñānam — knowledge; vijñānam — wisdom; āstikyam — religiousness; brahma — of a brāhmaṇa; karma — duty; svabhāva-jam — born of his own nature.
Translation: Peacefulness, self-control, austerity, purity, tolerance, honesty, knowledge, wisdom and religiousness – these are the natural qualities by which the brāhmaṇas work.

Chapter 18 Verse 43
Sanskrit: śauryaṁ tejo dhṛtir dākṣyaṁ yuddhe cāpy apalāyanam dānam īśvara-bhāvaś ca kṣātraṁ karma svabhāva-jam
Transliteration: śauryam — heroism; tejaḥ — power; dhṛtiḥ — determination; dākṣyam — resourcefulness; yuddhe — in battle; ca — and; api — also; apalāyanam — not fleeing; dānam — generosity; īśvara — of leadership; bhāvaḥ — the nature; ca — and; kṣātram — of a kṣatriya; karma — duty; svabhāva-jam — born of his own nature.
Translation: Heroism, power, determination, resourcefulness, courage in battle, generosity and leadership are the natural qualities of work for the kṣatriyas.

Chapter 18 Verse 44
Sanskrit: kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ vaiśya-karma svabhāva-jam paricaryātmakaṁ karma śūdrasyāpi svabhāva-jam
Transliteration: kṛṣi — plowing; go — of cows; rakṣya — protection; vāṇijyam — trade; vaiśya — of a vaiśya; karma — duty; svabhāva-jam — born of his own nature; paricaryā — service; ātmakam — consisting of; karma — duty; śūdrasya — of the śūdra; api — also; svabhāva-jam — born of his own nature.
Translation: Farming, cow protection and business are the natural work for the vaiśyas, and for the śūdras there are labor and service to others.

Chapter 18 Verse 45
Sanskrit: sve sve karmaṇy abhirataḥ saṁsiddhiṁ labhate naraḥ sva-karma-nirataḥ siddhiṁ yathā vindati tac chṛṇu
Transliteration: sve sve — each his own; karmaṇi — work; abhirataḥ — following; saṁsiddhim — perfection; labhate — achieves; naraḥ — a man; sva-karma — in his own duty; nirataḥ — engaged; siddhim — perfection; yathā — as; vindati — attains; tat — that; śṛṇu — listen.
Translation: By following his qualities of work, every man can become perfect. Now please hear from Me how this can be done.

Chapter 18 Verse 46
Sanskrit: yataḥ pravṛttir bhūtānāṁ yena sarvam idaṁ tatam sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya siddhiṁ vindati mānavaḥ
Transliteration: yataḥ — from whom; pravṛttiḥ — the emanation; bhūtānām — of all living entities; yena — by whom; sarvam — all; idam — this; tatam — is pervaded; sva-karmaṇā — by his own duties; tam — Him; abhyarcya — by worshiping; siddhim — perfection; vindati — achieves; mānavaḥ — a man.
Translation: By worship of the Lord, who is the source of all beings and who is all-pervading, a man can attain perfection through performing his own work.

Chapter 18 Verse 47
Sanskrit: śreyān sva-dharmo viguṇaḥ para-dharmāt sv-anuṣṭhitāt svabhāva-niyataṁ karma kurvan nāpnoti kilbiṣam
Transliteration: śreyān — better; sva-dharmaḥ — one’s own occupation; viguṇaḥ — imperfectly performed; para-dharmāt — than another’s occupation; su-anuṣṭhitāt — perfectly done; svabhāva-niyatam — prescribed according to one’s nature; karma — work; kurvan — performing; na — never; āpnoti — achieves; kilbiṣam — sinful reactions.
Translation: It is better to engage in one’s own occupation, even though one may perform it imperfectly, than to accept another’s occupation and perform it perfectly. Duties prescribed according to one’s nature are never affected by sinful reactions.

Chapter 18 Verse 48
Sanskrit: saha-jaṁ karma kaunteya sa-doṣam api na tyajet sarvārambhā hi doṣeṇa dhūmenāgnir ivāvṛtāḥ
Transliteration: saha-jam — born simultaneously; karma — work; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; sa-doṣam — with fault; api — although; na — never; tyajet — one should give up; sarva-ārambhāḥ — all ventures; hi — certainly; doṣeṇa — with fault; dhūmena — with smoke; agniḥ — fire; iva — as; āvṛtāḥ — covered.
Translation: Every endeavor is covered by some fault, just as fire is covered by smoke. Therefore one should not give up the work born of his nature, O son of Kuntī, even if such work is full of fault.

Chapter 18 Verse 49
Sanskrit: asakta-buddhiḥ sarvatra jitātmā vigata-spṛhaḥ naiṣkarmya-siddhiṁ paramāṁ sannyāsenādhigacchati
Transliteration: asakta-buddhiḥ — having unattached intelligence; sarvatra — everywhere; jita-ātmā — having control of the mind; vigata-spṛhaḥ — without material desires; naiṣkarmya-siddhim — the perfection of nonreaction; paramām — supreme; sannyāsena — by the renounced order of life; adhigacchati — one attains.
Translation: One who is self-controlled and unattached and who disregards all material enjoyments can obtain, by practice of renunciation, the highest perfect stage of freedom from reaction.

Chapter 18 Verse 50
Sanskrit: siddhiṁ prāpto yathā brahma tathāpnoti nibodha me samāsenaiva kaunteya niṣṭhā jñānasya yā parā
Transliteration: siddhim — perfection; prāptaḥ — achieving; yathā — as; brahma — the Supreme; tathā — so; āpnoti — one achieves; nibodha — try to understand; me — from Me; samāsena — summarily; eva — certainly; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; niṣṭhā — the stage; jñānasya — of knowledge; yā — which; parā — transcendental.
Translation: O son of Kuntī, learn from Me how one who has achieved this perfection can attain to the supreme perfectional stage, Brahman, the stage of highest knowledge, by acting in the way I shall now summarize.

Chapter 18 Verse 54
Sanskrit: brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati na kāṅkṣati samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām
Transliteration: brahma-bhūtaḥ — being one with the Absolute; prasanna-ātmā — fully joyful; na — never; śocati — laments; na — never; kāṅkṣati — desires; samaḥ — equally disposed; sarveṣu — to all; bhūteṣu — living entities; mat-bhaktim — My devotional service; labhate — gains; parām — transcendental.
Translation: One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments or desires to have anything. He is equally disposed toward every living entity. In that state he attains pure devotional service unto Me.

Chapter 18 Verse 55
Sanskrit: bhaktyā mām abhijānāti yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ tato māṁ tattvato jñātvā viśate tad-anantaram
Transliteration: bhaktyā — by pure devotional service; mām — Me; abhijānāti — one can know; yāvān — as much as; yaḥ ca asmi — as I am; tattvataḥ — in truth; tataḥ — thereafter; mām — Me; tattvataḥ — in truth; jñātvā — knowing; viśate — he enters; tat-anantaram — thereafter.
Translation: One can understand Me as I am, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, only by devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of Me by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God.

Chapter 18 Verse 56
Sanskrit: sarva-karmāṇy api sadā kurvāṇo mad-vyapāśrayaḥ mat-prasādād avāpnoti śāśvataṁ padam avyayam
Transliteration: sarva — all; karmāṇi — activities; api — although; sadā — always; kurvāṇaḥ — performing; mat-vyapāśrayaḥ — under My protection; mat-prasādāt — by My mercy; avāpnoti — one achieves; śāśvatam — the eternal; padam — abode; avyayam — imperishable.
Translation: Though engaged in all kinds of activities, My pure devotee, under My protection, reaches the eternal and imperishable abode by My grace.

Chapter 18 Verse 57
Sanskrit: cetasā sarva-karmāṇi mayi sannyasya mat-paraḥ buddhi-yogam upāśritya mac-cittaḥ satataṁ bhava
Transliteration: cetasā — by intelligence; sarva-karmāṇi — all kinds of activities; mayi — unto Me; sannyasya — giving up; mat-paraḥ — under My protection; buddhi-yogam — devotional activities; upāśritya — taking shelter of; mat-cittaḥ — in consciousness of Me; satatam — twenty-four hours a day; bhava — just become.
Translation: In all activities just depend upon Me and work always under My protection. In such devotional service, be fully conscious of Me.

Chapter 18 Verse 58
Sanskrit: mac-cittaḥ sarva-durgāṇi mat-prasādāt tariṣyasi atha cet tvam ahaṅkārān na śroṣyasi vinaṅkṣyasi
Transliteration: mat — of Me; cittaḥ — being in consciousness; sarva — all; durgāṇi — impediments; mat-prasādāt — by My mercy; tariṣyasi — you will overcome; atha — but; cet — if; tvam — you; ahaṅkārāt — by false ego; na śroṣyasi — do not hear; vinaṅkṣyasi — you will be lost.
Translation: If you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles of conditioned life by My grace. If, however, you do not work in such consciousness but act through false ego, not hearing Me, you will be lost.

Chapter 18 Verse 59
Sanskrit: yad ahaṅkāram āśritya na yotsya iti manyase mithyaiṣa vyavasāyas te prakṛtis tvāṁ niyokṣyati
Transliteration: yat — if; ahaṅkāram — of false ego; āśritya — taking shelter; na yotsye — I shall not fight; iti — thus; manyase — you think; mithyā eṣaḥ — this is all false; vyavasāyaḥ — determination; te — your; prakṛtiḥ — material nature; tvām — you; niyokṣyati — will engage.
Translation: If you do not act according to My direction and do not fight, then you will be falsely directed. By your nature, you will have to be engaged in warfare.

Chapter 18 Verse 60
Sanskrit: svabhāva-jena kaunteya nibaddhaḥ svena karmaṇā kartuṁ necchasi yan mohāt kariṣyasy avaśo ’pi tat
Transliteration: svabhāva-jena — born of your own nature; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; nibaddhaḥ — conditioned; svena — by your own; karmaṇā — activities; kartum — to do; na — not; icchasi — you like; yat — that which; mohāt — by illusion; kariṣyasi — you will do; avaśaḥ — involuntarily; api — even; tat — that.
Translation: Under illusion you are now declining to act according to My direction. But, compelled by the work born of your own nature, you will act all the same, O son of Kuntī.

Chapter 18 Verse 61
Sanskrit: īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ hṛd-deśe ’rjuna tiṣṭhati bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni yantrārūḍhāni māyayā
Transliteration: īśvaraḥ — the Supreme Lord; sarva-bhūtānām — of all living entities; hṛt-deśe — in the location of the heart; arjuna — O Arjuna; tiṣṭhati — resides; bhrāmayan — causing to travel; sarva-bhūtāni — all living entities; yantra — on a machine; ārūḍhani — being placed; māyayā — under the spell of material energy.
Translation: The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone’s heart, O Arjuna, and is directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of the material energy.

Chapter 18 Verse 62
Sanskrit: tam eva śaraṇaṁ gaccha sarva-bhāvena bhārata tat-prasādāt parāṁ śāntiṁ sthānaṁ prāpsyasi śāśvatam
Transliteration: tam — unto Him; eva — certainly; śaraṇam gaccha — surrender; sarva-bhāvena — in all respects; bhārata — O son of Bharata; tat-prasādāt — by His grace; parām — transcendental; śāntim — peace; sthānam — the abode; prāpsyasi — you will get; śāśvatam — eternal.
Translation: O scion of Bharata, surrender unto Him utterly. By His grace you will attain transcendental peace and the supreme and eternal abode.

Chapter 18 Verse 63
Sanskrit: iti te jñānam ākhyātaṁ guhyād guhya-taraṁ mayā vimṛśyaitad aśeṣeṇa yathecchasi tathā kuru
Transliteration: iti — thus; te — unto you; jñānam — knowledge; ākhyātam — described; guhyāt — than confidential; guhya-taram — still more confidential; mayā — by Me; vimṛśya — deliberating; etat — on this; aśeṣeṇa — fully; yathā — as; icchasi — you like; tathā — that; kuru — perform.
Translation: Thus I have explained to you knowledge still more confidential. Deliberate on this fully, and then do what you wish to do.

Chapter 18 Verse 64
Sanskrit: sarva-guhyatamaṁ bhūyaḥ śṛṇu me paramaṁ vacaḥ iṣṭo ’si me dṛḍham iti tato vakṣyāmi te hitam
Transliteration: sarva-guhya-tamam — the most confidential of all; bhūyaḥ — again; śṛṇu — just hear; me — from Me; paramam — the supreme; vacaḥ — instruction; iṣṭaḥ asi — you are dear; me — to Me; dṛḍham — very; iti — thus; tataḥ — therefore; vakṣyāmi — I am speaking; te — for your; hitam — benefit.
Translation: Because you are My very dear friend, I am speaking to you My supreme instruction, the most confidential knowledge of all. Hear this from Me, for it is for your benefit.

Chapter 18 Verse 65
Sanskrit: man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru mām evaiṣyasi satyaṁ te pratijāne priyo ’si me
Transliteration: mat-manāḥ — thinking of Me; bhava — just become; mat-bhaktaḥ — My devotee; mat-yājī — My worshiper; mām — unto Me; namaskuru — offer your obeisances; mām — unto Me; eva — certainly; eṣyasi — you will come; satyam — truly; te — to you; pratijāne — I promise; priyaḥ — dear; asi — you are; me — to Me.
Translation: Always think of Me, become My devotee, worship Me and offer your homage unto Me. Thus you will come to Me without fail. I promise you this because you are My very dear friend.

Chapter 18 Verse 66
Sanskrit: sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ
Transliteration: sarva-dharmān — all varieties of religion; parityajya — abandoning; mām — unto Me; ekam — only; śaraṇam — for surrender; vraja — go; aham — I; tvām — you; sarva — all; pāpebhyaḥ — from sinful reactions; mokṣayiṣyāmi — will deliver; mā — do not; śucaḥ — worry.
Translation: Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver you from all sinful reactions. Do not fear.

Chapter 18 Verse 67
Sanskrit: idaṁ te nātapaskāya nābhaktāya kadācana na cāśuśrūṣave vācyaṁ na ca māṁ yo ’bhyasūyati
Transliteration: idam — this; te — by you; na — never; atapaskāya — to one who is not austere; na — never; abhaktāya — to one who is not a devotee; kadācana — at any time; na — never; ca — also; aśuśrūṣave — to one who is not engaged in devotional service; vācyam — to be spoken; na — never; ca — also; mām — toward Me; yaḥ — anyone who; abhyasūyati — is envious.
Translation: This confidential knowledge may never be explained to those who are not austere, or devoted, or engaged in devotional service, nor to one who is envious of Me.

Chapter 18 Verse 68
Sanskrit: ya idaṁ paramaṁ guhyaṁ mad-bhakteṣv abhidhāsyati bhaktiṁ mayi parāṁ kṛtvā mām evaiṣyaty asaṁśayaḥ
Transliteration: yaḥ — anyone who; idam — this; paramam — most; guhyam — confidential secret; mat — of Mine; bhakteṣu — amongst devotees; abhidhāsyati — explains; bhaktim — devotional service; mayi — unto Me; parām — transcendental; kṛtvā — doing; mām — unto Me; eva — certainly; eṣyati — comes; asaṁśayaḥ — without doubt.
Translation: For one who explains this supreme secret to the devotees, pure devotional service is guaranteed, and at the end he will come back to Me.

Chapter 18 Verse 69
Sanskrit: na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ bhavitā na ca me tasmād anyaḥ priya-taro bhuvi
Transliteration: na — never; ca — and; tasmāt — than him; manuṣyeṣu — among men; kaścit — anyone; me — to Me; priya-kṛt-tamaḥ — more dear; bhavitā — will become; na — nor; ca — and; me — to Me; tasmāt — than him; anyaḥ — another; priya-taraḥ — dearer; bhuvi — in this world.
Translation: There is no servant in this world more dear to Me than he, nor will there ever be one more dear.

Chapter 18 Verse 70
Sanskrit: adhyeṣyate ca ya imaṁ dharmyaṁ saṁvādam āvayoḥ jñāna-yajñena tenāham iṣṭaḥ syām iti me matiḥ
Transliteration: adhyeṣyate — will study; ca — also; yaḥ — he who; imam — this; dharmyam — sacred; saṁvādam — conversation; āvayoḥ — of ours; jñāna — of knowledge; yajñena — by the sacrifice; tena — by him; aham — I; iṣṭaḥ — worshiped; syām — shall be; iti — thus; me — My; matiḥ — opinion.
Translation: And I declare that he who studies this sacred conversation of ours worships Me by his intelligence.

Chapter 18 Verse 71
Sanskrit: śraddhāvān anasūyaś ca śṛṇuyād api yo naraḥ so ’pi muktaḥ śubhāḻ lokān prāpnuyāt puṇya-karmaṇām
Transliteration: śraddhā-vān — faithful; anasūyaḥ — not envious; ca — and; śṛṇuyāt — does hear; api — certainly; yaḥ — who; naraḥ — a man; saḥ — he; api — also; muktaḥ — being liberated; śubhān — the auspicious; lokān — planets; prāpnuyāt — he attains; puṇya-karmaṇām — of the pious.
Translation: And one who listens with faith and without envy becomes free from sinful reactions and attains to the auspicious planets where the pious dwell.

Chapter 18 Verse 72
Sanskrit: kaccid etac chrutaṁ pārtha tvayaikāgreṇa cetasā kaccid ajñāna-sammohaḥ praṇaṣṭas te dhanañ-jaya
Transliteration: kaccit — whether; etat — this; śrutam — heard; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; tvayā — by you; eka-agreṇa — with full attention; cetasā — by the mind; kaccit — whether; ajñāna — of ignorance; sammohaḥ — the illusion; praṇaṣṭaḥ — dispelled; te — of you; dhanam-jaya — O conqueror of wealth (Arjuna).
Translation: O son of Pṛthā, O conqueror of wealth, have you heard this with an attentive mind? And are your ignorance and illusions now dispelled?

Chapter 18 Verse 73
Sanskrit: arjuna uvāca naṣṭo mohaḥ smṛtir labdhā tvat-prasādān mayācyuta sthito ’smi gata-sandehaḥ kariṣye vacanaṁ tava
Transliteration: arjunaḥ uvāca — Arjuna said; naṣṭaḥ — dispelled; mohaḥ — illusion; smṛtiḥ — memory; labdhā — regained; tvat-prasādāt — by Your mercy; mayā — by me; acyuta — O infallible Kṛṣṇa; sthitaḥ — situated; asmi — I am; gata — removed; sandehaḥ — all doubts; kariṣye — I shall execute; vacanam — order; tava — Your.
Translation: Arjuna said: My dear Kṛṣṇa, O infallible one, my illusion is now gone. I have regained my memory by Your mercy. I am now firm and free from doubt and am prepared to act according to Your instructions.

Chapter 18 Verse 74
Sanskrit: sañjaya uvāca ity ahaṁ vāsudevasya pārthasya ca mahātmanaḥ saṁvādam imam aśrauṣam adbhutaṁ roma-harṣaṇam
Transliteration: sañjayaḥ uvāca — Sañjaya said; iti — thus; aham — I; vāsudevasya — of Kṛṣṇa; pārthasya — and Arjuna; ca — also; mahā-ātmanaḥ — of the great soul; saṁvādam — discussion; imam — this; aśrauṣam — have heard; adbhutam — wonderful; roma-harṣaṇam — making the hair stand on end.
Translation: Sañjaya said: Thus have I heard the conversation of two great souls, Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna. And so wonderful is that message that my hair is standing on end.

Chapter 18 Verse 75
Sanskrit: vyāsa-prasādāc chrutavān etad guhyam ahaṁ param yogaṁ yogeśvarāt kṛṣṇāt sākṣāt kathayataḥ svayam
Transliteration: vyāsa-prasādāt — by the mercy of Vyāsadeva; śrutavān — have heard; etat — this; guhyam — confidential; aham — I; param — the supreme; yogam — mysticism; yoga-īśvarāt — from the master of all mysticism; kṛṣṇāt — from Kṛṣṇa; sākṣāt — directly; kathayataḥ — speaking; svayam — personally.
Translation: By the mercy of Vyāsa, I have heard these most confidential talks directly from the master of all mysticism, Kṛṣṇa, who was speaking personally to Arjuna.

Chapter 18 Verse 76
Sanskrit: rājan saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya saṁvādam imam adbhutam keśavārjunayoḥ puṇyaṁ hṛṣyāmi ca muhur muhuḥ
Transliteration: rājan — O King; saṁsmṛtya — remembering; saṁsmṛtya — remembering; saṁvādam — message; imam — this; adbhutam — wonderful; keśava — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; arjunayoḥ — and Arjuna; puṇyam — pious; hṛṣyāmi — I am taking pleasure; ca — also; muhuḥ muhuḥ — repeatedly.
Translation: O King, as I repeatedly recall this wondrous and holy dialogue between Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, I take pleasure, being thrilled at every moment.

Chapter 18 Verse 77
Sanskrit: tac ca saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya rūpam aty-adbhutaṁ hareḥ vismayo me mahān rājan hṛṣyāmi ca punaḥ punaḥ
Transliteration: tat — that; ca — also; saṁsmṛtya — remembering; saṁsmṛtya — remembering; rūpam — form; ati — greatly; adbhutam — wonderful; hareḥ — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; vismayaḥ — wonder; me — my; mahān — great; rājan — O King; hṛṣyāmi — I am enjoying; ca — also; punaḥ punaḥ — repeatedly.
Translation: O King, as I remember the wonderful form of Lord Kṛṣṇa, I am struck with wonder more and more, and I rejoice again and again.

Chapter 18 Verse 78
Sanskrit: yatra yogeśvaraḥ kṛṣṇo yatra pārtho dhanur-dharaḥ tatra śrīr vijayo bhūtir dhruvā nītir matir mama
Transliteration: yatra — where; yoga-īśvaraḥ — the master of mysticism; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; yatra — where; pārthaḥ — the son of Pṛthā; dhanuḥ-dharaḥ — the carrier of the bow and arrow; tatra — there; śrīḥ — opulence; vijayaḥ — victory; bhūtiḥ — exceptional power; dhruvā — certain; nītiḥ — morality; matiḥ mama — my opinion.
Translation: Wherever there is Kṛṣṇa, the master of all mystics, and wherever there is Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will also certainly be opulence, victory, extraordinary power, and morality. That is my opinion.
