Chapter 9 Verse 1
Sanskrit: śrī-bhagavān uvāca idaṁ tu te guhya-tamaṁ pravakṣyāmy anasūyave jñānaṁ vijñāna-sahitaṁ yaj jñātvā mokṣyase ’śubhāt
Transliteration: śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; idam — this; tu — but; te — unto you; guhya-tamam — the most confidential; pravakṣyāmi — I am speaking; anasūyave — to the nonenvious; jñānam — knowledge; vijñāna — realized knowledge; sahitam — with; yat — which; jñātvā — knowing; mokṣyase — you will be released; aśubhāt — from this miserable material existence.
Translation: The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Arjuna, because you are never envious of Me, I shall impart to you this most confidential knowledge and realization, knowing which you shall be relieved of the miseries of material existence.

Chapter 9 Verse 2
Sanskrit: rāja-vidyā rāja-guhyaṁ pavitram idam uttamam pratyakṣāvagamaṁ dharmyaṁ su-sukhaṁ kartum avyayam
Transliteration: rāja-vidyā — the king of education; rāja-guhyam — the king of confidential knowledge; pavitram — the purest; idam — this; uttamam — transcendental; pratyakṣa — by direct experience; avagamam — understood; dharmyam — the principle of religion; su-sukham — very happy; kartum — to execute; avyayam — everlasting.
Translation: This knowledge is the king of education, the most secret of all secrets. It is the purest knowledge, and because it gives direct perception of the self by realization, it is the perfection of religion. It is everlasting, and it is joyfully performed.

Chapter 9 Verse 3
Sanskrit: aśraddadhānāḥ puruṣā dharmasyāsya paran-tapa aprāpya māṁ nivartante mṛtyu-saṁsāra-vartmani
Transliteration: aśraddadhānāḥ — those who are faithless; puruṣāḥ — such persons; dharmasya — toward the process of religion; asya — this; param-tapa — O killer of the enemies; aprāpya — without obtaining; mām — Me; nivartante — come back; mṛtyu — of death; saṁsāra — in material existence; vartmani — on the path.
Translation: Those who are not faithful in this devotional service cannot attain Me, O conqueror of enemies. Therefore they return to the path of birth and death in this material world.

Chapter 9 Verse 4
Sanskrit: mayā tatam idaṁ sarvaṁ jagad avyakta-mūrtinā mat-sthāni sarva-bhūtāni na cāhaṁ teṣv avasthitaḥ
Transliteration: mayā — by Me; tatam — pervaded; idam — this; sarvam — all; jagat — cosmic manifestation; avyakta-mūrtinā — by the unmanifested form; mat-sthāni — in Me; sarva-bhūtāni — all living entities; na — not; ca — also; aham — I; teṣu — in them; avasthitaḥ — situated.
Translation: By Me, in My unmanifested form, this entire universe is pervaded. All beings are in Me, but I am not in them.

Chapter 9 Verse 5
Sanskrit: na ca mat-sthāni bhūtāni paśya me yogam aiśvaram bhūta-bhṛn na ca bhūta-stho mamātmā bhūta-bhāvanaḥ
Transliteration: na — never; ca — also; mat-sthāni — situated in Me; bhūtāni — all creation; paśya — just see; me — My; yogam aiśvaram — inconceivable mystic power; bhūta-bhṛt — the maintainer of all living entities; na — never; ca — also; bhūta-sthaḥ — in the cosmic manifestation; mama — My; ātmā — Self; bhūta-bhāvanaḥ — the source of all manifestations.
Translation: And yet everything that is created does not rest in Me. Behold My mystic opulence! Although I am the maintainer of all living entities and although I am everywhere, I am not a part of this cosmic manifestation, for My Self is the very source of creation.

Chapter 9 Verse 6
Sanskrit: yathākāśa-sthito nityaṁ vāyuḥ sarvatra-go mahān tathā sarvāṇi bhūtāni mat-sthānīty upadhāraya
Transliteration: yathā — just as; ākāśa-sthitaḥ — situated in the sky; nityam — always; vāyuḥ — the wind; sarvatra-gaḥ — blowing everywhere; mahān — great; tathā — similarly; sarvāṇi bhūtāni — all created beings; mat-sthāni — situated in Me; iti — thus; upadhāraya — try to understand.
Translation: Understand that as the mighty wind, blowing everywhere, rests always in the sky, all created beings rest in Me.

Chapter 9 Verse 7
Sanskrit: sarva-bhūtāni kaunteya prakṛtiṁ yānti māmikām kalpa-kṣaye punas tāni kalpādau visṛjāmy aham
Transliteration: sarva-bhūtāni — all created entities; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; prakṛtim — nature; yānti — enter; māmikām — My; kalpa-kṣaye — at the end of the millennium; punaḥ — again; tāni — all those; kalpa-ādau — in the beginning of the millennium; visṛjāmi — create; aham — I.
Translation: O son of Kuntī, at the end of the millennium all material manifestations enter into My nature, and at the beginning of another millennium, by My potency, I create them again.

Chapter 9 Verse 8
Sanskrit: prakṛtiṁ svām avaṣṭabhya visṛjāmi punaḥ punaḥ bhūta-grāmam imaṁ kṛtsnam avaśaṁ prakṛter vaśāt
Transliteration: prakṛtim — the material nature; svām — of My personal Self; avaṣṭabhya — entering into; visṛjāmi — I create; punaḥ punaḥ — again and again; bhūta-grāmam — all the cosmic manifestations; imam — these; kṛtsnam — in total; avaśam — automatically; prakṛteḥ — of the force of nature; vaśāt — under obligation.
Translation: The whole cosmic order is under Me. Under My will it is automatically manifested again and again, and under My will it is annihilated at the end.

Chapter 9 Verse 9
Sanskrit: na ca māṁ tāni karmāṇi nibadhnanti dhanañ-jaya udāsīna-vad āsīnam asaktaṁ teṣu karmasu
Transliteration: na — never; ca — also; mām — Me; tāni — all those; karmāṇi — activities; nibadhnanti — bind; dhanam-jaya — O conqueror of riches; udāsīna-vat — as neutral; āsīnam — situated; asaktam — without attraction; teṣu — for those; karmasu — activities.
Translation: O Dhanañjaya, all this work cannot bind Me. I am ever detached from all these material activities, seated as though neutral.

Chapter 9 Verse 10
Sanskrit: mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram hetunānena kaunteya jagad viparivartate
Transliteration: mayā — by Me; adhyakṣeṇa — by superintendence; prakṛtiḥ — material nature; sūyate — manifests; sa — both; cara-acaram — the moving and the nonmoving; hetunā — for the reason; anena — this; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; jagat — the cosmic manifestation; viparivartate — is working.
Translation: This material nature, which is one of My energies, is working under My direction, O son of Kuntī, producing all moving and nonmoving beings. Under its rule this manifestation is created and annihilated again and again.

Chapter 9 Verse 11
Sanskrit: avajānanti māṁ mūḍhā mānuṣīṁ tanum āśritam paraṁ bhāvam ajānanto mama bhūta-maheśvaram
Transliteration: avajānanti — deride; mām — Me; mūḍhāḥ — foolish men; mānuṣīm — in a human form; tanum — a body; āśritam — assuming; param — transcendental; bhāvam — nature; ajānantaḥ — not knowing; mama — My; bhūta — of everything that be; mahā-īśvaram — the supreme proprietor.
Translation: Fools deride Me when I descend in the human form. They do not know My transcendental nature as the Supreme Lord of all that be.

Chapter 9 Verse 12
Sanskrit: moghāśā mogha-karmāṇo mogha-jñānā vicetasaḥ rākṣasīm āsurīṁ caiva prakṛtiṁ mohinīṁ śritāḥ
Transliteration: mogha-āśāḥ — baffled in their hopes; mogha-karmāṇaḥ — baffled in fruitive activities; mogha-jñānāḥ — baffled in knowledge; vicetasaḥ — bewildered; rākṣasīm — demonic; āsurīm — atheistic; ca — and; eva — certainly; prakṛtim — nature; mohinīm — bewildering; śritāḥ — taking shelter of.
Translation: Those who are thus bewildered are attracted by demonic and atheistic views. In that deluded condition, their hopes for liberation, their fruitive activities, and their culture of knowledge are all defeated.

Chapter 9 Verse 13
Sanskrit: mahātmānas tu māṁ pārtha daivīṁ prakṛtim āśritāḥ bhajanty ananya-manaso jñātvā bhūtādim avyayam
Transliteration: mahā-ātmānaḥ — the great souls; tu — but; mām — unto Me; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; daivīm — divine; prakṛtim — nature; āśritāḥ — having taken shelter of; bhajanti — render service; ananya-manasaḥ — without deviation of the mind; jñātvā — knowing; bhūta — of creation; ādim — the origin; avyayam — inexhaustible.
Translation: O son of Pṛthā, those who are not deluded, the great souls, are under the protection of the divine nature. They are fully engaged in devotional service because they know Me as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, original and inexhaustible.

Chapter 9 Verse 14
Sanskrit: satataṁ kīrtayanto māṁ yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ namasyantaś ca māṁ bhaktyā nitya-yuktā upāsate
Transliteration: satatam — always; kīrtayantaḥ — chanting; mām — about Me; yatantaḥ — fully endeavoring; ca — also; dṛḍha-vratāḥ — with determination; namasyantaḥ — offering obeisances; ca — and; mām — Me; bhaktyā — in devotion; nitya-yuktāḥ — perpetually engaged; upāsate — worship.
Translation: Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great determination, bowing down before Me, these great souls perpetually worship Me with devotion.

Chapter 9 Verse 15
Sanskrit: jñāna-yajñena cāpy anye yajanto mām upāsate ekatvena pṛthaktvena bahudhā viśvato-mukham
Transliteration: jñāna-yajñena — by cultivation of knowledge; ca — also; api — certainly; anye — others; yajantaḥ — sacrificing; mām — Me; upāsate — worship; ekatvena — in oneness; pṛthaktvena — in duality; bahudhā — in diversity; viśvataḥ-mukham — and in the universal form.
Translation: Others, who engage in sacrifice by the cultivation of knowledge, worship the Supreme Lord as the one without a second, as diverse in many, and in the universal form.

Chapter 9 Verse 16
Sanskrit: ahaṁ kratur ahaṁ yajñaḥ svadhāham aham auṣadham mantro ’ham aham evājyam aham agnir ahaṁ hutam
Transliteration: aham — I; kratuḥ — Vedic ritual; aham — I; yajñaḥ — smṛti sacrifice; svadhā — oblation; aham — I; aham — I; auṣadham — healing herb; mantraḥ — transcendental chant; aham — I; aham — I; eva — certainly; ājyam — melted butter; aham — I; agniḥ — fire; aham — I; hutam — offering.
Translation: But it is I who am the ritual, I the sacrifice, the offering to the ancestors, the healing herb, the transcendental chant. I am the butter and the fire and the offering.

Chapter 9 Verse 17
Sanskrit: pitāham asya jagato mātā dhātā pitāmahaḥ vedyaṁ pavitram oṁ-kāra ṛk sāma yajur eva ca
Transliteration: pitā — father; aham — I; asya — of this; jagataḥ — universe; mātā — mother; dhātā — supporter; pitāmahaḥ — grandfather; vedyam — what is to be known; pavitram — that which purifies; oṁ-kāra — the syllable oṁ; ṛk — the Ṛg Veda; sāma — the Sāma Veda; yajuḥ — the Yajur Veda; eva — certainly; ca — and.
Translation: I am the father of this universe, the mother, the support and the grandsire. I am the object of knowledge, the purifier and the syllable oṁ. I am also the Ṛg, the Sāma and the Yajur Vedas.

Chapter 9 Verse 18
Sanskrit: gatir bhartā prabhuḥ sākṣī nivāsaḥ śaraṇaṁ suhṛt prabhavaḥ pralayaḥ sthānaṁ nidhānaṁ bījam avyayam
Transliteration: gatiḥ — goal; bhartā — sustainer; prabhuḥ — Lord; sākṣī — witness; nivāsaḥ — abode; śaraṇam — refuge; su-hṛt — most intimate friend; prabhavaḥ — creation; pralayaḥ — dissolution; sthānam — ground; nidhānam — resting place; bījam — seed; avyayam — imperishable.
Translation: I am the goal, the sustainer, the master, the witness, the abode, the refuge and the most dear friend. I am the creation and the annihilation, the basis of everything, the resting place and the eternal seed.

Chapter 9 Verse 19
Sanskrit: tapāmy aham ahaṁ varṣaṁ nigṛhṇāmy utsṛjāmi ca amṛtaṁ caiva mṛtyuś ca sad asac cāham arjuna
Transliteration: tapāmi — give heat; aham — I; aham — I; varṣam — rain; nigṛhṇāmi — withhold; utsṛjāmi — send forth; ca — and; amṛtam — immortality; ca — and; eva — certainly; mṛtyuḥ — death; ca — and; sat — spirit; asat — matter; ca — and; aham — I; arjuna — O Arjuna.
Translation: O Arjuna, I give heat, and I withhold and send forth the rain. I am immortality, and I am also death personified. Both spirit and matter are in Me.

Chapter 9 Verse 20
Sanskrit: trai-vidyā māṁ soma-pāḥ pūta-pāpā yajñair iṣṭvā svar-gatiṁ prārthayante te puṇyam āsādya surendra-lokam aśnanti divyān divi deva-bhogān
Transliteration: trai-vidyāḥ — the knowers of the three Vedas; mām — Me; soma-pāḥ — drinkers of soma juice; pūta — purified; pāpāḥ — of sins; yajñaiḥ — with sacrifices; iṣṭvā — worshiping; svaḥ-gatim — passage to heaven; prārthayante — pray for; te — they; puṇyam — pious; āsādya — attaining; sura-indra — of Indra; lokam — the world; aśnanti — enjoy; divyān — celestial; divi — in heaven; deva-bhogān — the pleasures of the gods.
Translation: Those who study the Vedas and drink the soma juice, seeking the heavenly planets, worship Me indirectly. Purified of sinful reactions, they take birth on the pious, heavenly planet of Indra, where they enjoy godly delights.

Chapter 9 Verse 21
Sanskrit: te taṁ bhuktvā svarga-lokaṁ viśālaṁ kṣīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśanti evaṁ trayī-dharmam anuprapannā gatāgataṁ kāma-kāmā labhante
Transliteration: te — they; tam — that; bhuktvā — having enjoyed; svarga-lokam — heaven; viśālam — vast; kṣīṇe — being exhausted; puṇye — the results of their pious activities; martya-lokam — to the mortal earth; viśanti — fall down; evam — thus; trayī — of the three Vedas; dharmam — doctrines; anuprapannāḥ — following; gata-āgatam — death and birth; kāma-kāmāḥ — desiring sense enjoyments; labhante — attain.
Translation: When they have thus enjoyed vast heavenly sense pleasure and the results of their pious activities are exhausted, they return to this mortal planet again. Thus those who seek sense enjoyment by adhering to the principles of the three Vedas achieve only repeated birth and death.

Chapter 9 Verse 22
Sanskrit: ananyāś cintayanto māṁ ye janāḥ paryupāsate teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānāṁ yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham
Transliteration: ananyāḥ — having no other object; cintayantaḥ — concentrating; mām — on Me; ye — those who; janāḥ — persons; paryupāsate — properly worship; teṣām — of them; nitya — always; abhiyuktānām — fixed in devotion; yoga — requirements; kṣemam — protection; vahāmi — carry; aham — I.
Translation: But those who always worship Me with exclusive devotion, meditating on My transcendental form – to them I carry what they lack, and I preserve what they have.

Chapter 9 Verse 23
Sanskrit: ye ’py anya-devatā-bhaktā yajante śraddhayānvitāḥ te ’pi mām eva kaunteya yajanty avidhi-pūrvakam
Transliteration: ye — those who; api — also; anya — of other; devatā — gods; bhaktāḥ — devotees; yajante — worship; śraddhayā anvitāḥ — with faith; te — they; api — also; mām — Me; eva — only; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; yajanti — they worship; avidhi-pūrvakam — in a wrong way.
Translation: Those who are devotees of other gods and who worship them with faith actually worship only Me, O son of Kuntī, but they do so in a wrong way.

Chapter 9 Verse 24
Sanskrit: ahaṁ hi sarva-yajñānāṁ bhoktā ca prabhur eva ca na tu mām abhijānanti tattvenātaś cyavanti te
Transliteration: aham — I; hi — surely; sarva — of all; yajñānām — sacrifices; bhoktā — the enjoyer; ca — and; prabhuḥ — the Lord; eva — also; ca — and; na — not; tu — but; mām — Me; abhijānanti — they know; tattvena — in reality; ataḥ — therefore; cyavanti — fall down; te — they.
Translation: I am the only enjoyer and master of all sacrifices. Therefore, those who do not recognize My true transcendental nature fall down.

Chapter 9 Verse 25
Sanskrit: yānti deva-vratā devān pitṝn yānti pitṛ-vratāḥ bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā yānti mad-yājino ’pi mām
Transliteration: yānti — go; deva-vratāḥ — worshipers of demigods; devān — to the demigods; pitṝn — to the ancestors; yānti — go; pitṛ-vratāḥ — worshipers of ancestors; bhūtāni — to the ghosts and spirits; yānti — go; bhūta-ijyāḥ — worshipers of ghosts and spirits; yānti — go; mat — My; yājinaḥ — devotees; api — but; mām — unto Me.
Translation: Those who worship the demigods will take birth among the demigods; those who worship the ancestors go to the ancestors; those who worship ghosts and spirits will take birth among such beings; and those who worship Me will live with Me.

Chapter 9 Verse 26
Sanskrit: patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ yo me bhaktyā prayacchati tad ahaṁ bhakty-upahṛtam aśnāmi prayatātmanaḥ
Transliteration: patram — a leaf; puṣpam — a flower; phalam — a fruit; toyam — water; yaḥ — whoever; me — unto Me; bhaktyā — with devotion; prayacchati — offers; tat — that; aham — I; bhakti-upahṛtam — offered in devotion; aśnāmi — accept; prayata-ātmanaḥ — from one in pure consciousness.
Translation: If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, a fruit or water, I will accept it.

Chapter 9 Verse 27
Sanskrit: yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi yaj juhoṣi dadāsi yat yat tapasyasi kaunteya tat kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam
Transliteration: yat — whatever; karoṣi — you do; yat — whatever; aśnāsi — you eat; yat — whatever; juhoṣi — you offer; dadāsi — you give away; yat — whatever; yat — whatever; tapasyasi — austerities you perform; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; tat — that; kuruṣva — do; mat — unto Me; arpaṇam — as an offering.
Translation: Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer or give away, and whatever austerities you perform – do that, O son of Kuntī, as an offering to Me.

Chapter 9 Verse 28
Sanskrit: śubhāśubha-phalair evaṁ mokṣyase karma-bandhanaiḥ sannyāsa-yoga-yuktātmā vimukto mām upaiṣyasi
Transliteration: śubha — from auspicious; aśubha — and inauspicious; phalaiḥ — results; evam — thus; mokṣyase — you will become free; karma — of work; bandhanaiḥ — from the bondage; sannyāsa — of renunciation; yoga — the yoga; yukta-ātmā — having the mind firmly set on; vimuktaḥ — liberated; mām — to Me; upaiṣyasi — you will attain.
Translation: In this way you will be freed from bondage to work and its auspicious and inauspicious results. With your mind fixed on Me in this principle of renunciation, you will be liberated and come to Me.

Chapter 9 Verse 29
Sanskrit: samo ’haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu na me dveṣyo ’sti na priyaḥ ye bhajanti tu māṁ bhaktyā mayi te teṣu cāpy aham
Transliteration: samaḥ — equally disposed; aham — I; sarva-bhūteṣu — to all living entities; na — no one; me — to Me; dveṣyaḥ — hateful; asti — is; na — nor; priyaḥ — dear; ye — those who; bhajanti — render transcendental service; tu — but; mām — unto Me; bhaktyā — in devotion; mayi — are in Me; te — such persons; teṣu — in them; ca — also; api — certainly; aham — I.
Translation: I envy no one, nor am I partial to anyone. I am equal to all. But whoever renders service unto Me in devotion is a friend, is in Me, and I am also a friend to him.

Chapter 9 Verse 30
Sanskrit: api cet su-durācāro bhajate mām ananya-bhāk sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ samyag vyavasito hi saḥ
Transliteration: api — even; cet — if; su-durācāraḥ — one committing the most abominable actions; bhajate — is engaged in devotional service; mām — unto Me; ananya-bhāk — without deviation; sādhuḥ — a saint; eva — certainly; saḥ — he; mantavyaḥ — is to be considered; samyak — completely; vyavasitaḥ — situated in determination; hi — certainly; saḥ — he.
Translation: Even if one commits the most abominable action, if he is engaged in devotional service he is to be considered saintly because he is properly situated in his determination.

Chapter 9 Verse 31
Sanskrit: kṣipraṁ bhavati dharmātmā śaśvac-chāntiṁ nigacchati kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati
Transliteration: kṣipram — very soon; bhavati — becomes; dharma-ātmā — righteous; śaśvat-śāntim — lasting peace; nigacchati — attains; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; pratijānīhi — declare; na — never; me — My; bhaktaḥ — devotee; praṇaśyati — perishes.
Translation: He quickly becomes righteous and attains lasting peace. O son of Kuntī, declare it boldly that My devotee never perishes.

Chapter 9 Verse 32
Sanskrit: māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye ’pi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās te ’pi yānti parāṁ gatim
Transliteration: mām — of Me; hi — certainly; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; vyapāśritya — particularly taking shelter; ye — those who; api — also; syuḥ — are; pāpa-yonayaḥ — born of a lower family; striyaḥ — women; vaiśyāḥ — mercantile people; tathā — also; śūdrāḥ — lower-class men; te api — even they; yānti — go; parām — to the supreme; gatim — destination.
Translation: O son of Pṛthā, those who take shelter in Me, though they be of lower birth – women, vaiśyas [merchants] and śūdras [workers] – can attain the supreme destination.

Chapter 9 Verse 33
Sanskrit: kiṁ punar brāhmaṇāḥ puṇyā bhaktā rājarṣayas tathā anityam asukhaṁ lokam imaṁ prāpya bhajasva mām
Transliteration: kim — how much; punaḥ — again; brāhmaṇāḥ — brāhmaṇas; puṇyāḥ — righteous; bhaktāḥ — devotees; rāja-ṛṣayaḥ — saintly kings; tathā — also; anityam — temporary; asukham — full of miseries; lokam — planet; imam — this; prāpya — gaining; bhajasva — be engaged in loving service; mām — unto Me.
Translation: How much more this is so of the righteous brāhmaṇas, the devotees and the saintly kings. Therefore, having come to this temporary, miserable world, engage in loving service unto Me.

Chapter 9 Verse 34
Sanskrit: man-manā bhava mad-bhakto mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru mām evaiṣyasi yuktvaivam ātmānaṁ mat-parāyaṇaḥ
Transliteration: mat-manāḥ — always thinking of Me; bhava — become; mat — My; bhaktaḥ — devotee; mat — My; yājī — worshiper; mām — unto Me; namas-kuru — offer obeisances; mām — unto Me; eva — completely; eṣyasi — you will come; yuktvā — being absorbed; evam — thus; ātmānam — your soul; mat-parāyaṇaḥ — devoted to Me.
Translation: Engage your mind always in thinking of Me, become My devotee, offer obeisances to Me and worship Me. Being completely absorbed in Me, surely you will come to Me.
